So I wanted to start out with an introduction
to the go language itself. Now I know that
this is much storied territory, but I have
to start somewhere. And this is going to serve
as a stepping off point for us to go through
a survey of the entire go language, as well
as hitting some of the key libraries along
the way. So the first thing that we need to
know is that go is created by a small team
within Google. And that team was made up of
Robert griesemer, Rob Pike, and Ken Thompson.
Now these guys have been around the software
industry for a little while, for example,
Ken designed and implemented the first Unix
operating system, as well as had a key role
in the development of Unicode. So when these
guys got together and decided that they wanted
to create a language, we had a lot of talent
in the room as soon as these guys got together.
But one of the questions that we need to understand
is, why create a new language at all? Well,
to understand that, we have to look at the
languages that are common inside of Google.
And that's the time that go is being designed,
there were really three languages that were
key. The first is Python, then Java, and then
C and c++. Now, each of these languages in
and of itself is very powerful. However, the
go designers started to recognize that there
were some limitations that Google was running
into, that might not be able to be fixed,
given the history and the designs of the existing
languages. So for example, when we look at
Python, Python is very easy to use, but it's
an interpreted language. And so it can be
a little bit difficult to run applications
at Google scale that are based on Python,
it can certainly happen. But that is one of
the challenges that you can run into in very
large Python implementations. Java is very
quick, but its type system has become increasingly
complex over time. Now, this is a natural
trend that a lot of languages go through.
They start out very simple, but it has additional
use cases and additional features are layered
into the language, it becomes increasingly
more difficult to navigate things C and c++
is quick as well. However, it suffers from
a complex type system. And additionally, its
compile times are notoriously slow. Now, the
type system has been receiving a lot of attention
lately in the C and c++ communities. However,
they still have the burden of needing to manage
all that legacy code. And so similar to Java,
it's very difficult for them to move past
the history that they have, because c++ applications
written 10 years ago still need to compile
today. And the slow compile times are another
legacy issue that C and c++ have inherited
as well. When C and c++ were designed computers
had nowhere near as much memory as they do
today. So the decision was made to optimize
the compilers to use a minimum amount of memory.
And one of the compromises that that brought
about was the compile times can be a little
bit sluggish. In addition, all three of these
languages were created in a time where multi
threaded applications were extremely rare.
Almost every application that was created
really had to focus on a single thread at
a time. So concurrency patterns built into
these languages are patched in at best. And
so working in highly parallel, highly concurrent
applications like Google often runs into can
be a little bit challenging when working in
these three languages. So enter go, What does
go bring to the party in order to address
some of these concerns? Well, the first thing
that we need to understand is gozi, strong
and statically typed language, so it inherits
that same feature set from Java and c++. So
what do we mean by strong and statically typed
with strong typing means that the type of
a variable cannot change over time. So when
you declare a variable a to hold an integer,
it's always going to hold an integer, you
can't put a Boolean in it, you can't put a
string in it. And static typing means that
all of those variables have to be defined
at compile time. Now, are there ways around
that? Yes, go does have features that allow
you to get around its type system, but 99%
of the time, you're going to be living in
a world that's strong and statically typed.
And getting all the benefits that come with
that. Now, if you come from languages such
as Java, then you might be a little concerned
that strong and statically typed languages
tend to be a little bit verbose. Well, we'll
see as we get into some go syntax, how there's
been a lot of effort taken to make the compiler
do as much work to understand what you're
talking about with a variable. So you don't
have to explain to the compiler every time
what your variable types and things like that
are.
In addition, go like a lot of recent languages
has a strong focus on the community that supporting
it. Just because go is an excellent language
does not guarantee success. Because there
are so many languages out there, that it can
become difficult for a new developer to ramp
up in any one. As a result, there's a strong
community built up around go that's really
focused on making sure that the go language
keeps moving forward, and that new developers
have an easier time as possible ramping up
onto the language. So what are some of the
key features of the language itself? One of
the first and I would argue most important
features that go has is a recognition that
simplicity is a feature. So as we go through
and start learning about the go language,
you're going to run into some features and
you're going to ask yourself, Well, why doesn't
this exist? Or why don't we have that feature?
And a lot of the reasons Come back to this
feature. There's a recognition that if the
go language recognizes simplicity is important,
then that means that we're going to have to
decide to leave out some other features that
might be very useful, but would add complexity
to the language. Additionally, go focuses
on extremely fast compile times a lot of modern
development environments to write code fast
to build it fast and to test it fast and get
feedback back to the developer as quick as
possible. Well, if you've got a 45 minute
compile time, it breaks that cycle. And developers
have a very hard time staying in that design
build test loop. And so go focuses on keeping
those compile times down, even though it's
going to yield us fully compiled binaries
at the end, go as a garbage collected language,
which means that you're not going to have
to manage your own memory. Now you can manage
your own memory. But by and large, the go
runtime is going to manage that for you. And
the reason for that gets back to this simplicity
argument, there is a recognition that a garbage
collected language does have challenges when
dealing with certain use cases. For example,
real time trading systems for stock market
systems have a very hard time when you're
dealing with garbage collection. However,
the advantages on the developer of not having
to manage their own memory all the time, were
deemed to be more important. Now, that doesn't
mean that the delays that a garbage collector
incurs haven't been paid attention to, if
you go back through the history of the go
language, you'll actually see the past few
versions have had a huge emphasis on reducing
the amount of time that the application has
to pause during a garbage collection cycle.
And at this point, they're actually really
fast, almost to the point that you don't know
that a garbage collection happened, in order
to address that concern of concurrency go
does have concurrency primitives built right
into the language. And we'll talk about that
as we go through some of these videos. But
instead of having a library that we're going
to have to import, in order to work with concurrency,
we're going to be able to do concurrent development
right there in the base language. Finally,
go compiles down to a standalone library,
which means when you compile your go application,
everything is going to be bundled into that
single binary that's related to the go application
itself. So the go runtime is going to be bundled
in there, any libraries that you're depending
on, they're going to be compiled in there.
So you don't have to worry about reaching
out to external libraries and DLLs, and things
like that in order to make your application
work. And what that gives you is version management
at runtime becomes trivial. Because you simply
have one binary, you deploy that binary, you
run it, and all of its dependencies are there.
Now keep in mind, when I say dependencies,
I mean to go dependencies, if you're going
to build a web application that has HTML,
resources, and CSS, those have to be bundled
along with the binary, but the binary itself
is standalone and self contained. Okay, the
next thing that I'd like to do is show you
some of the resources that are available to
you, as you start to explore the go language.
One of the most useful resources that you're
going to be able to take advantage of as you're
ramping up on go, is goes website here@golang.org.
Now, why is it go lang.org? Well, if you take
a minute to think about a language called
go, that doesn't really lend itself to unique
search results in Google or Bing. So go lang.org
it is, as a matter of fact, a lot of places
that you see go mentioned, you're gonna see
it actually described as go Lang, because
that makes it a little bit more unique when
you're looking for search results. So the
first thing that you might notice, as we go
into the homepage here is this isn't really
laid out like a lot of traditional home pages.
This, in my opinion, is very much an engineering
homepage. So instead of a lot of design aesthetic,
this gets right into the engineering aspects
and shows you how to start working with the
language. So this yellow box over here is
going to be your entry point for your first
go application. So if we go ahead and click
this run button, you see that we almost instantly
get an application sent back to the server,
it gets compiled, and it gets run for us.
So we can start playing around with go code
without installing anything on our local machines.
And we're actually going to take advantage
of that through this first few videos. As
a matter of fact, if I make a small change
here, so maybe if I will say, Hello, YouTube
peoples and run that again, then I'm saying
hello to y'all, so Hi. So it's as simple as
that in order to get started with the go program.
Beside that window, we see this download GO
button. And that's going to take you to resources
that you're going to be able to use in order
to download the latest go binaries, as well
as download older versions of the runtime.
And if there's an unpublished version, for
example, at the time I'm recording this go
1.8 is at RC two, you can go ahead and download
that install that and check that for bugs
and play around with new features in the language.
If we come across at the top, we see this
documents link here. And this is going to
be another critical resource as you're starting
out with the language. As a matter of fact,
you're going to refer back to this page quite
often. But if you really want to walk through
on the website, a tour of the go languages,
and I would recommend you go to this Getting
Started link. This is going to get you started
downloading and installing the go compilers
and tools and things like that. And you can
see as we navigate there, it's going to show
you the different architectures that you're
going to be able to use with go and there's
quite a few and how to get started on each
one of those. If we keep continuing down the
tour of go is kind of an introduction to the
go language that takes you through a gradual
introduction. So it's going to start out with
some very simple Apple And then build up more
and more and more and help you understand
what's going on with go concurrency and things
like that. Effective go is a very useful article,
especially as you start to mature in your
understanding of the language, and really
understand how the go language is used. So
I would encourage you to go into that it's
a pretty lengthy
read. But you should consider this required
reading if you're actually going to start
building non trivial go applications. But
we're not going to worry about that right
now. We got plenty ways to go before we need
to get through all of this stuff. And then
down here at the bottom is some reference
information. This is more advanced documentation
that you're probably not going to need right
away. But for example, the command documentation
gives you a lot of information about the go
tool itself that you're going to use for local
development with go, there's a lot of things
that the go program does. And this is going
to help you understand how to navigate that.
The packages link is perhaps where I spend
the most time on gos website. And this gives
you documentation for all of the libraries
that are built into go. So when you install
go and you install the go binaries and tools,
you're going to get all of these libraries
available to you. So just scanning down, you
can see that we've got different libraries
that are targeted at working with archives,
we've got some cryptography libraries, database
drivers, continuing to go down, we've got
some things for working with HTML, and network
traffic. Now, some things that you might find
missing here are we don't have any GUI libraries.
That's because at this point go really isn't
focused on the use case of client application
development. So go is really targeted at building
servers and web applications. And so that's
where a lot of the libraries are going to
be focused on. There are some projects that
are working on mobile applications using go
as well as client side applications using
go but they're not officially supported at
this point. If we come over to the project
link, we're going to find some information
about history of the project, what releases
have come out and when, as well as some links
to mailing lists and resources that you can
take advantage of. If you want to keep track
of the development of go as a language as
well as if you find an issue in the go language,
you can see some information here on how to
report that issue. And then we've got the
Help link here. And this is going to be one
of your more important links as you get started
here because this is going to be your on ramp
into the community. Now the two most active
in my experience are the go forum, which is
a nice discussion forum that allows you to
post your questions and get people to answer
back. But if you want something a little bit
more real time then the gopher slack is a
Slack channel specifically targeted at NGO
development. And there's multiple sub channels
in there for new developers for library developers.
Even a lot of the NGO meetup groups have their
own sub channels on the gopher slack. So if
you want to get on the gopher slack that I
would encourage you to come over here to another
website called go Lang bridge. And this is
what I consider the on ramp to the NGO community.
Because NGO Lang bridge is specifically there
to advocate for the go language, and to make
sure that the community is healthy and strong.
As I said, one of the key aspects of the go
language is a focus on having an excellent
community. And really, it's go Lang bridge
and the awesome people that support it, that
are making that happen. So if you scroll down
a little bit, you can see some links to the
online communities. If you want to join the
Slack channel, you do have to receive an invite.
So this link here is going to take you to
the forum that's going to allow you to get
that invitation. And there's no problem getting
the invitation, the only thing that they asked
you is to read the community guidelines, there
is a code of conduct that just make sure that
everybody is going to be treated respectfully
in the community, just to make sure that we're
all here trying to help each other out. And
the last thing that I want to show you on
the website is this play link here. Now this
link just flies out an editor. And this is
really nice, because this is available throughout
the site. So if I come to the packages, and
let's just say I dive into the network package,
and I'm learning about some network function,
then I can go ahead and pop into the play,
I can create a real quick proof of concept
go application in order to make sure that
I understand how that's working. And again,
just like we saw on that homepage, if I click
run that I can go ahead and execute that.
Now there are some limitations, obviously,
this application is sent to the back end.
And there are some limitations, you're not
gonna be able to read the file system at the
back end, for example.
But a lot of the things that you want to play
around with, you can play around with in this
online environment. Now another place to get
at this playground is over here at play that
golang.org. And this is the last thing I want
to show you in this introductory video. So
this is going to be the environment that we're
going to focus on. And actually, let me make
that a little bit bigger. So maybe it's a
little easier for you to see. But this is
going to be the environment that we're going
to focus on as we start to learn the go language.
So we're going to learn the basics of go application
here, we're going to start playing around
with how we're going to work with variables
and logic and looping and things like that.
Now, eventually, we'll get to installing a
local environment. And you can certainly take
advantage of the other resources on go Lang
website, if you want to get there before I
create a video on it. But I think that there's
a lot that we can talk about without making
a commitment to setting up a local development
environment by just going through this playground
here. So if we take a second look at this
application, we see some of the key aspects
of any go program. And the first thing that
you see at the top is this statement package
main. Every go application is structured into
packages. So every go file that you're going
to have is going to have to declare what package
it's a part of nain is a special package,
because main is going to be the entry point
of any one of your applications. Down below
that we have an import statement. And this
is the statement that we're going to use in
order to import additional libraries. So this
library is called thumped, which Yeah, you
actually say that in the NGO community, I
can't bring myself to say that. So if I call
that FMT, I hope that you'll forgive me. But
in the NGO community, you will often hear
this called thumped. And this is the package
is going to allow us to format strings. So
you see down below here and our main function,
which is the entry point of our application,
so the main function in the main package is
always going to be our application entry point.
And this is going to be where we're going
to contain our first code that's going to
run in go. So we're going to call into the
FMT library. And we're going to pull out its
print ln function, and that print ln function
takes one argument, and that argument in this
case is a string. So we're going to print
out Hello playground. Now if I go ahead and
run this, then down below at the bottom of
the screen, here, you see Hello, playground
gets printed out. And then it says program
exited. If we have an error in the application,
say if I delete this quotation mark and run,
then you're going to get a compiler error
printed out at the bottom, that's going to
help you debug your application. So this online
environments going to be very good for you
to get started, because it's going to help
you through understanding what's going on.
So for example, we see here in line eight,
it got an unexpected semi colon or new line,
when instead it was expecting a comma or a
parenthesis. And the reason for that is because
this closing parenthesis actually became part
of the string. So the line terminated early,
and it didn't have an end to the function
call. So if we go ahead and re add the quotation
mark, and run, we're good to go. And we've
got our first start in a go application. So
I hope that this was helpful for you a little
bit of background in a language that you're
going to be learning I always find is a little
bit valuable, it helps to understand the motivations
for the creation of the language and the major
features, in order to understand what problems
that language is going to try and solve and
how it's going to go about trying to solve
them. What I want to show you is how to get
started setting up your own local development
environment to program with go. Now I know
in the last video, I showed you this website
here, and I said that this is what I want
to use. That is the website it played@golang.org.
And I said that this is the website that I
want to use in order to show you a lot of
concepts that you're going to need to be familiar
with with the go language. And that's still
my plan. But as I thought about it, I decided
that it doesn't really make sense to force
you to use the playground, just because it's
a really good place for me to demonstrate
concepts. So I want you to have all the tools
available to you to set up your own local
NGO development environment. So you can play
around with creating your own applications
as you learn about this wonderful language.
So the first thing that we're going to need
to do is we're going to need to download and
install the go language in the go tools itself.
And so in order to get started with that,
we're going to start over here@golang.org.
And we're going to click on this download
go link here.
Now this link is going to take you to all
sorts of different versions of go. But in
general, if you're getting started, just pick
the latest stable version that's available
for you, and it's not going to steer you wrong.
Now, if you're a Windows user, then I would
encourage you to click this MSI link, it's
going to download an installer and go is going
to be put on your system automatically. However,
if you're using os 10, or Linux, then I would
recommend that you go to this installation
instructions link here and follow the instructions
here. Now, you're still going to need to download
the go binaries. But if you scroll down just
a little bit, you're going to see this command
here. And this is going to give you the tar
command that you're going to need to use in
order to unpack the go binary and install
it onto your system. So I've already done
that. And I can show you that by opening up
a terminal here. And the default location
to put go is in the user directory underneath
local and then in a folder called go. So if
we look at there, and they look at the contents
there, I see that I have all the go tools
installed. So with the Windows Installer,
all it's going to do is it's going to place
these into C colon backslash go. And I would
strongly encourage you if you can accept these
default locations that you go ahead and do
that because it's going to make setting up
your environment just a little bit simpler.
Now after we get go installed, we have a little
bit of configuration in our environment in
order to be able to use go effectively. So
I'm going to come back to my home directory
here. And I'm going to make a change to my
bash RC file. Now I'm on Ubuntu. So it's going
to be in my bash RC file. If you're an LS
10, it's going to be your bash profile. If
you're in Windows, basically what we're doing
is we're setting environment variables. So
if I open that up and come down to the bottom,
then I see that I've got the pre generated
bash script. I'm not going to really worry
about that. But there's a couple of variables
that we're going to need to set. Hello, everybody,
I need to pause the video here for a second
and make an important announcement. So as
soon as I originally released this video,
Dave cainy came in within a couple of minutes
and he expressed a concern about one of the
things that I'm about to talk about. Now I'm
about to talk about setting a couple of environment
variables here and showing you how they work.
Now one of those variables is called go route.
And setting go route has been shown to cause
problems as you move through different versions.
Go, especially if you've got multiple versions
of the language on your system. So if you
want more information about that Dave has
a really good blog post here that you can
go to to learn more information about it.
But for now, please keep in mind, if you're
able to install go at its default locations,
which on Unix or Mac is going to be slash
user slash local slash go in on Windows is
going to be C colon, backslash go. If you're
able to do that, please do that. And then
go ahead and avoid setting go route. Now you
will need to set the PATH variable to go roots
bin directory in order to access the go executable.
And you will need to set go path which we're
going to talk about after that. But if you
can avoid setting the go route environment
variable, it's going to save you a lot of
heartache. So well, I'm going to show you
how to do that in case you do need to set
it please avoid that if at all possible. Okay,
at this point, I'm going to resume the video
and continue talking about the environment
setup. Now the first variable that you're
going to need to know about is called go route.
Now, if you've installed go to its default
location, you're not going to need to worry
about this. But if you've decided to install
go somewhere else, for example, maybe you've
installed it in your home directory, then
you can go ahead and set go route. And that'll
tell the environment where to go to find the
go binaries. Now the next thing that we want
to do is we actually want to set a PATH variable
to the go binaries themselves. So I'm going
to go ahead and export a PATH variable. And
that'll Of course, start with my existing
path. And then I'm going to add on to that
go route. And then I'm going to whack on the
path slash bin. So there's quite a few binaries
that we're going to be using on a regular
basis. And those are in go route slash bin,
so you're going to want to make sure that
that's part of your path. Now once I do that,
let me go ahead and save this. And then I
will use the source command in order to get
my shell to reread the bash RC file. And then
I should be able to test to make sure it goes
available by typing go and version. And you
can see here I'm running go version 1.8 release
candidate three.
Okay, now there's one more thing that we need
to do in order to get our environment fully
set up. And I'm going to go back into my bash
RC file in order to do that. And that is the
setting of a second environment variable.
So we have go route. And that's going to tell
the environment where goes installed. But
we're also going to be downloading a lot of
packages as we work with go, because we're
going to be taking advantage of libraries
that other people have published in order
to build our own applications out. So those
applications as well as our own source code
are not going to be located with the go binaries,
they're going to be located in a path that
we're going to specify with a another variable
called go path. Now go path is either one
of the most awesome or one of the most horrible
things about go because it gives you this
really nice way to specify where you go projects
are located. However, it does kind of push
you towards having this monolithic repository
of all these binaries and your applications
tied together. So I'll show you a little bit
of a hint on how to work with that. But for
now, let's go ahead and set a go PATH variable
in my home directory. And then I will call
this go lib. Now just like with go route,
we might have some executable binaries that
are going to be stored in our gopath. So I'm
going to go ahead and export on our path again.
And we'll start with our existing path. And
then I want to add on go path slash bin. That
way if we install any libraries that have
executables, and we will be installing libraries
that have executables, then we're going to
be able to track that. Now just to show you
real quick what that's going to do. Let me
go ahead and save this out resource, my bash
RC file. And then I've actually already created
this folder here called go live. Now if I
go into go lib, and I look at the contents
of that it's currently empty. But I can change
that by using a tool called go get. So if
I get a library that's at github.com slash
NSF slash go code. This is historically the
library that people use to provide autocomplete
functionality in their go applications. So
if I go ahead and hit Enter, and wait a second,
then go back into my go lib folder. And look,
now I've got some content here. So if I look
in the bin directory, I've got this go code
executable. And if I come back to the source
directory, then I see that I've got this GitHub
comm folder. And inside of that is NSF. And
inside of that is go code. So if I come in
here, here's all of the source code for the
go code library. So when I'm working with
go code, it actually downloads the source
code and compiles it into the go code library
for me. And that's what that go path is going
to do for you. The problem that you might
run into is that this use of gopath tends
to drive towards monolithic repository. So
you're going to have go code, you're going
to have your own code, you're going to have
all sorts of other libraries, all put into
this one location. Now when I create my courses,
that creates a lot of visual clutter. And
so that isn't exactly the form of gopath that
I use. What I do is coming back into my bash
RC file is I actually use a capability of
gopath to create a compound gopath. So instead
of a single path here, I'm actually going
to re export go path and I'm going to add
on an additional path to this and I'm going
to add Home mic and code. Now a lot of times
when I'm teaching courses, I only need to
go pants. And so I've got go live. And that's
going to be where all my third party libraries
go. And then I'm going to have another folder,
that's going to be what's called by workspace
location. So let's go ahead and write this
out. We'll source this again. And now I've
got the full gopath. So if I come into my
NGO lib, and I remove everything from it,
now it's empty again. So if I go ahead and
go get that repository, again@github.com slash
NSF slash go code. And now you see that it
actually goes into my go lib folder. If I
come into my code folder, which I also created
earlier, that's still empty. So the first
segment of your go path is going to be used
by go get in order to store your files, but
all of the segments of your go path are going
to be searched for source code. So that's
going to really help us as we're setting up
our workspace. So speaking of which, that's
the next thing that I want to do. So a workspace
in go isn't anything special, the only thing
that you need in order to create a workspace
is to have a single directory called SRC in
it. So if I add a directory called SRC into
my code folder, then I've got to go workspace.
Now SRC, as you might expect, is where you're
going to keep your source code. So when I
set go path to slash home slash Mike slash
code, it's going to look for an SRC directory
in order to find my source code. Now, there
are two other directories that you might find
in a workspace that are interesting. And we
found one already when we installed that go
code library. And that's been. So anytime
we're working with a project and a binary
is created, it's going to be put into that
bin directory. And that's also why we added
that bin segment to our path,
the last directory that you might find in
your workspace is a pkg directory. So for
compiling something, and it's going to generate
an intermediate binary, which means it's not
going to be a fully compiled application,
it's going to be an intermediate step. So
for example, if we're taking a third party
library, and we're integrating that into our
application, then the pkg directory is where
those intermediate binaries are going to be
stored. And the reason those are created is
so that they don't have to be recompiled every
time. So when you compile your go application,
go is going to check to see if any of the
source files in that directory have changed
since the last time it compiled them. If it
hasn't, then it's not going to recompile that
package, it's just going to go ahead and link
them into the binary that it's creating for
you. Okay, so let's go ahead and clear this
out. Because that's getting a little bit cluttered.
And now let's set up an editor to work with
go code. Now, there's a lot of editors that
are out there. And so what I'm going to show
you is just one, but feel free to explore
the option for your favorite editor, because
there's probably a go plugin for it. And all
of these plugins are really good right now.
So I'm going to show you the one that I've
been using lately, which is Visual Studio
code, now might be a little bit surprising
Microsoft, oh my goodness, they're doing all
this really awesome stuff for the open source
community. But it's really true, one of the
best development experiences that you're likely
to come across with go is in this Microsoft
product
running on Linux. So I've already installed
it. But if you do need to install it, you
can come here to code Visual Studio Comm.
It's going to give you the binaries. In this
case, I'm running Ubuntu. So I would download
this.db file and install that onto my system.
And then I'm going to be able to run that
by simply typing code in my application launcher,
or I've already set up a shortcut over here
in my taskbar. So as soon as I run that, I'm
going to be presented with this. Now you can
see I've already opened up a folder here,
you can open up a folder to your workspace
by simply file open, and then pick your folder
that you want to be working with. So we're
going to be working with code. But there is
one setup step that I need to go through before
Visual Studio code is quite ready to go. And
that is I need to install the plugin that's
going to allow us to work with go code. And
so if I click this button down here called
extensions, then I have a list of all sorts
of extensions that I can add in for Visual
Studio code. Now, right here is the go extension
by Lu COVID. Now there's a couple of go extensions,
but I would strongly recommend you use this
one here by Luke, because it is really amazing.
It offers a lot of capability, it really makes
Visual Studio Code of first class environment
for developing go, okay, and as fast as that
that's been installed. And it was that fast,
because it's been cashed from earlier. And
then I'm all set and ready to build my first
go application. So let me go ahead into this
source directory. And I'm going to create
a folder that's going to contain my source
code. Now your first temptation might be to
just plug in your source code right here in
your src folder. But I wouldn't recommend
that the standard structure that you're going
to use in a go application is to mirror where
your application is going to be in source
control. And that makes it go gettable. So
in this case, if I was going to keep this
file on GitHub, I would create a folder called
github.com. And then underneath that, my GitHub
account is vi n si Mk II don't ask long story
about why I called it that. And then I would
have an application name. So I would call
this maybe first app, and that's the folder
that I'm going to store my application in.
And the reason for that is if you think about
if I check this into GitHub, and observatory
called first app, when I go get that, it's
going to recreate this structure. And so you
want to create your applications following
that structure. So now I'm ready to create
my first file, and I will call that main go.
And then I can start adding in my source code.
So the first thing that I'm going to add is
package main. And then when I save this, oh,
it looks like I expected something to happen
here. And it's not happening. I think it's
because yeah, he told me that I needed to
reload the environment. Good. So I'm going
to go ahead and do that. So I'm going to exit
out of Visual Studio code, and it should kick
right back off, but it has to initialize the
plugin. So now I see what I was expecting
to see. And that is that the NGO plugin has
recognized that they don't have all the tools
that it needs in order to provide me all the
support that it can, because the NGO plugin
for Visual Studio code is actually like a
lot of the plugins and other languages, it
takes advantage of these language services,
for example, it's talking to me about go land,
go lint isn't available on my system. And
so it's not going to be able to provide linting
capabilities. So basically, the go plugin,
cause up to all these language services. The
nice thing about that is if you decide to
flip between different editors, your experience
is pretty much the same, because they're all
relying on the same language services in order
to provide you the capabilities that you have
something go ahead and install all. And you
can see there's a pretty long list of
libraries that it's installing for me. Okay,
and now they're all installed. So that took
about a minute to install all those dependencies.
So I expect that you'd probably have a similar
experience in your own environment. Now, before
we start adding anything else, I actually
put some quotation marks around this package,
that's not going to be correct. And now I'm
ready to start actually building out my program.
So let me go ahead and put in an import statement
here. And we haven't talked too much about
imports. But we have mentioned a little bit
about packages, packages, or how code is organized
into sub libraries inside of NGO. So for example,
if I want to build a web application, then
I might pull in the net HTTP package that
you see here, in order to set up my web request
handlers. But for now, I just want to do a
simple Hello, go example. And so I'm just
going to import the FMT package. But you notice
that the NGO plugin for Visual Studio Code
gives me autocomplete, so any library that's
available on my go path is going to be found
here. So now I'm going to create a simple
function called main. And inside of that,
I'm going to access the FMT package. And notice
that I get autocomplete functionality here.
So I can go ahead and say I want to call the
print ln function, and it gives me the signature
for that function. So I can go ahead and add
that in here. And the I just want to say hello,
go. Okay, so in order to run this, inside
of Visual Studio code, you do have the ability
by pressing Ctrl backtick, you can open up
a terminal right here inside of the editor.
And there's a couple of different options
that I have in order to run my application.
So the first thing that I can do is I can
use gos run command, as you see here, and
I can give the path all the way through to
my source code. So if I come and I just keep
tapping through, then I'm going to get source
slash github.com, slash vianne, si MKE slash
first app slash main.go. So if I run that,
then it will compile that temporarily, and
run that for me. And it also compile in any
third party libraries. So the FMT package
was compiled in as well. Now, that's a really
good way to get a really quick run. Another
way that you have available to you is to use
go build and go build takes the actual package
path. So all we're going to do here, is compile
the first app package. Now, if it finds a
main package with a main function, then it's
going to compile that as an executable, like
you see right here in my home directory. So
I can go ahead and run that. Now the last
build tool that I have available is go install,
go install is actually expecting to be pointed
to a package that has an entry point. And
it's going to install that into your bin folder.
So let's go ahead and see that work. So we'll
go to github.com, my username for GitHub,
and then first app again. So notice I'm using
the package address, I'm not using the folder
path. If I run that, notice, I don't get anything
in my main directory. But if I come into this
bin folder here, now I've got first app over
here. So if I come back to my terminal, bin
slash first app, run that I get Hello, go
printed out again. Okay, so the last thing
that I want to show you if I come back over
to the terminal, so you see how we have all
the packages that we're working with locally
over here in this code directory. If I come
to the first element of my go path, which
is go lib, and look at that, you'll see that
this is starting to become a pretty busy place
here. Because now I've got three source folders.
And if I come into GitHub comm, you'll see
that I've got quite a few packages. So now
all of these third party dependencies aren't
cluttering up my main workspace. They're all
in this go lib folder, and then I can focus
on my development in my code folder. Now the
last place that you're going to see packages
is over in the NGO installation directory.
So if I look in that folder, you see here
that I have this directory called source.
So the ghost source code itself is in fact
a valid go workspace. So if I come in here
look If the folders in here, you see, these
are exactly the go standard library. So here's
FMT. Here. You see if I scroll down a little
bit the net package, if I go into the net
package, you'll see that that contains the
HTTP package. If I come into the HTTP package,
and list those contents, you see all of the
source codes for all of the modules that you
can see over here at go. Lang Comm. So if
I follow that through, over here, scroll down
to net, and HTTP, you see all of the capabilities
that are available in here? Well, all of those
are provided by this source code here. So
if you have any questions about how any one
of those libraries work, or how something's
configured, you can jump right into the source
code and see how it's all put together. Over
the last couple of videos, we've laid some
foundation by talking about the history and
the features of go and working through setting
up the local development environment. What
today is the day that we're going to start
a discussion about the go language itself
by discussing how to work with variables.
So in order to fully cover how to work with
variables, there's several topics that we're
going to need to cover. We're going to start
by learning how to declare variables. Then
we'll move into a discussion about how go
considers read declaration variables. And
this concept of shadowing. After that, we'll
talk about visibility, where we're going
to learn how we can control what aspects of
our program can see a variable that we create,
then we'll talk about naming conventions.
And finally, we'll wrap up with a brief discussion
about how to convert variables from one type
to another. Okay, so let's go ahead and get
started. So I'm going to be using the playground
in order to host our conversation. That way,
you can follow along whether you've set up
a local development environment, or just want
to follow along online. So as you can see,
when we first load up the playground, we've
got this one statement program, which is just
printing out the string hello playground to
the bottom of the screen, when I click this
run button here. Now this statement can only
ever do one thing because we're passing in
a string literal. And similarly, if I pass
in the number, say 42, and run it, then we
print 42 out. Now no matter what we send to
this print ln function, it's only going to
ever do that one thing. So in order to provide
a little bit more flexibility to our application,
we're going to introduce variables. So there's
actually three different ways to declare variables
and go and we're going to go through each
one of those. And then we'll talk a little
bit about where you might use each format.
So the first thing that we can do is actually
declare the variable itself. And that'll be
done using this kind of a statement. So we're
going to start with the var keyword, then
we're going to have the name of the variable
and the type of the variable. Now if you come
from another strongly typed language, this
might look a little bit backwards, because
you might be expecting to see something like
int i. Well, that's not actually how go works.
And if you think about it, the way gos structures,
things actually looks more like how you read
it. So I'm going to declare a variable called
I that's going to be of type integer. So the
way you declare variables and go, it's pretty
much the same way that you speak. And so it
might look a little bit odd when you first
start working with it. But it very quickly
becomes intuitive. Now that we have our variable
declared, we can go ahead and assign a value
to it. And we'll do that simply with the equals
operator. So once we have that set, we can
go ahead and replace this with an AI, run
it and we print the value 42 out. And since
variables in go can vary, we can go ahead
and change the value of that to say 27. When
we run again, we get the value 27 printed
out. So now even though the statement can
only ever do one thing at a time, the program
that runs up above this FORMAT statement can
actually influence the value that's printed
out to the console. Okay, so let's go ahead
and get rid of this, and then explore another
way to initialize this variable. Because one
of the things that we trying to do and go
is we want to keep things simple. So if we
need multiple lines, then we'll go ahead and
do that. But we don't want anything to be
more verbose than we have to. So we can actually
combine these two lines in one like this.
So we can initialize the variable i as an
integer and assign the value 42 in the same
line. So if we go ahead and run this, then
no big surprise, we get the value 42 printed
out. Now, this is actually still making us
work a little bit harder than we need to.
Because since we're assigning the value 42
to this, the go compiler can actually figure
out what data type it needs to have. So we
can go ahead and tell it to figure this out
for us by replacing all this text with this
text here. So if we just say I and then use
this colon equal operator and the value 42,
and run this, then we get this really nice
concise way of setting things up. Now, where
are you going to need each one of these? Well,
let me go ahead and add them back in so we
can talk about them. So we'll set var I integer
i equals 42. And then we'll use var j integer
equals 27. And then we'll set up K and that's
going to be equal to
99.
So we have these three different formats.
So when are you gonna want to use each one
of these? Well, the nice thing about this
first format is there are going to be times
when you want to declare a variable but you're
not ready to initialize it yet. So for example,
if you want to declare variable in the scope
of this main function, and then you have a
loop or something like that, that sets up
a local variable scope. And that's where the
variable is actually going to be assigned,
then you can go ahead and use this first syntax.
The second syntax is valuable, if go doesn't
have enough information to actually assign
the type that you really want assign to it.
So to show that, let me go ahead and add another
print statement here. And I'm going to need
to come up these other lines out in order
to make things happy for us. So let me go
ahead and change this print ln to a print
F. And what this is going to do is it's going
to allow us to provide a formatting string
and print things out that way. So we'll print
out the value, and then I'll print out the
type of the variable, and then I'll pass in
j twice. And so if I run this, then we get
the value 27. And no big surprise, it's an
integer. But what if we want this to be, for
example, a floating point number? Well, with
this syntax, it's as simple as just changing
this to float 32. When we run this, then go
understand that we want to use 27 as a floating
point number. Now, if we tried that with K,
down here, so let me uncomment the K, switch
this over to use K and run, then you see that
the number 99 is inferred to be of type integer.
And we can influence that a little bit by
adding a decimal point. And that's going to
give a hint, making that a float 64. But there's
no way to use this colon equals syntax to
initialize a float 32. For example, go is
either going to decide it's an integer type,
or it's a float 64 type. So if you need a
little bit more control than the second declaration,
syntax is going to be valuable for you. Now
the next thing that I want to show you is
how we can declare variables. Now we've been
declaring variables one at a time and inside
of a function. Well, another way that you
can declare variables is up here at the package
level. Now when you're doing it at the package
level, you cannot use this colon equals syntax,
you actually have to use the full declaration
syntax. So we can declare a variable is an
integer set equal to 42. So that works, come
down, wipe out this code, and then replace
this with I. And you see that we have the
value 42. And it's of type integer. So just
like we have before, we can go ahead and tell
it to declare that as a float 32. And the
compiler recognizes, well, I can make 42 a
floating point number, that's not going to
be a problem at all. Now, of course, if you
try something like this, the compiler has
no idea how to convert the string food to
a floating point number, and so it's going
to fail on you. Another thing that we can
do at the package level is we can actually
create a block of variables that are declared
together. And to show you why that's valuable.
Let me just drop in some variables that we
can play around with. Okay, so as you can
see, I've got a little bit of Doctor Who has
a brain here, and say I'm writing a program
that's going to print out some information
about the doctor's companions. So here we
got a variable actor name, that's going to
be Elisabeth Sladen, then we got her companion
name, which doctor she worked with, and what
season she was on. So by declaring these variables
like this, things are actually a little bit
cluttered. Because again, we want things in
go to be as clear and concise as possible.
So all these var keywords are actually cluttering
things up a little bit. So what we can do
instead of this is actually wrap this whole
section with a VAR block. And then we can
actually get rid of the use of this var keyword.
And now all of these variables are going to
be declared because they're inside of this
var block. And we can actually show that they're
related somehow. Now they don't have to be
related. That's a design decision. But we
can do that. So if we had another set of variables
that were related to a different context.
So say, for example, we had a counter, and
that was going to be an integer initialized
to zero, then we can have multiple variable
blocks at the package level. And that's just
going to allow you to organize your application
a little better, and keep your code a little
bit cleaner. Now the next thing that I want
to show you and let me just drop in some code
here is how variables work when you're trying
to read Eclair them.
So you can see in this application, we're
declaring the variable i up here in the package
scope, then I'm declaring it here inside of
the main function, and then I'm re declaring
it here on line 11. Now, if I try and run
this, I'm actually going to get an error.
And the error comes on line 11 here, because
there's no new variables here. So I can reassign
the value of i 13. But I can't declare a new
variable here. And that's because the variables
already declared on line 10. And you can't
declare the variable twice in the same scope.
However, if I get rid of this line, notice
that the application runs just fine, and uses
the value 42. So even though I is declared
twice in my application, once at the package
level, and once inside of the main function,
that's okay. And what happens is that the
variable with the innermost scope actually
takes precedence. So this is called shadowing.
So the package level is still available,
but it's being hidden by the declaration in
the main function. And I can actually show
that by copying this line up here
and running this. And now you see I get 27,
which is the package level scope. Then I create
the shadow Variable setting equal to 42. And
when I print out I again, then I get the new
value of i. Now another interesting thing
about variables in go is that they always
have to be used. So let me just drop in this
example here. And let's walk through it. So
I'm declaring a variable, I'm setting it equal
to 42, then I'm instantiating, a variable
j, setting it equal to 13. But I'm only using
i. So what happens when I run this? Well,
if I do, I actually get yelled at, because
j is declared and not used. And this is one
of the things that's going to keep your go
applications nice and clean. If you have a
local variable that's declared and not used,
then that's actually a compile time error.
And the reason that's really valuable is as
your application grows and evolves, and new
features are added and old features are deprecated,
you're very likely to end up with some old
code hanging around inside of your functions.
Well, if any of your old code or variables
and those variables are no longer used, then
the compiler is going to detect that for you
see that you can make sure that you can clean
those out. Now another important thing to
know about when you're working with variables
is how to name them. And there's actually
two sets of rules that you're going to need
to keep track of. One is how naming controls
visibility of the variable and go. And the
other is the naming conventions themselves.
So notice that I've been creating lowercase
variables. Well, that actually isn't always
the case in NGO, because if I'm declaring
a variable, and let's just declare it at the
package level, and I declared as an integer,
with the name I, and I go ahead and work with
that, then that lowercase variable name actually
means that this variable is scoped to this
package. Now, this is a main package. And
so this doesn't really matter so much. But
when we get into working with packages, this
becomes extremely important. So lowercase
variables are scoped to the package, which
means anything that consumes the package,
can't see it and can't work with it. But if
I switch to an uppercase letter, then that's
what's going to trigger the go compiler to
expose this variable to the outside world.
So it's a very simple naming convention. And
there's really only three levels of visibility
for variables in go. If you have it at the
package level, and as lowercase is scoped
to the package, so any file in the same package
can access that variable. If it's uppercase
at the package level, then it's export at
the front of package and it's globally visible.
And the third scope is block scope. So when
we have this main function here, it's actually
establishing a block scope. So when we declare
this variable I write here on line 10, that
variable is scoped to the block. And so that's
never visible outside of the block itself.
Now beyond that, it's important to understand
the naming conventions in go, and there's
a couple rules that we need to follow. The
first is that the length of the variable name
should reflect the life of the variable. So
for example, in this example, we're declaring
a variable i, and we're using it right away.
So having a very simple variable name is perfectly
acceptable. And this is going to be especially
true if you're declaring counters and for
loops and things like that, it's very common
have single letter or very, very concise variable
names, because the lifespan of that variable
is very small. And the amount of time that
you have to keep the meaning of that variable
in your head is very small as well. However,
if you're declaring a variable that you use
for a very long time, then it's best practice
to use a longer name. So for example, if this
was going to represent the season number that
our companion was on, so say, season 11. And
we use that throughout this entire main function,
then we'd want to use a name something like
season number. Now, if you're working with
a package level variable, and that package
level variable is going to be used in quite
a few other places, then that's where you're
going to want to use the most verbose variable
name. Now, you still shouldn't get crazy,
you shouldn't have 50 character long variable
names if you can avoid it. So keep your names
as short as you can. But make sure that the
names of those exported or package level variables
are clear enough so that somebody who's outside
of that source file understands the meaning
of it. The other thing I'd like to talk about
is how to work with acronyms, because in other
languages, you might see variables like the
URL, and then maybe this is http google.com.
You might see a variables name like this.
Well, the best practice and go is actually
to keep these acronyms as all uppercase. So
if you're working with a variable called the
URL, the URL should be all uppercase. Similarly,
HTTP and any variables like that. So anytime
you see an acronym, make sure that that's
all uppercase. And the reason is for readability,
it's very clear, we're used to seeing URL
and HTTP all put together. So when you read
this variable, it's very clear that you're
talking about an HTTP. Maybe you're talking
about an HTTP request that reads a little
bit cleaner than if you go ahead and make
those lowercase. So just some rules to keep
in mind as you're creating variables. Now
the next example that I want to show you is
how we can actually convert from one variable
type to another. So notice that I have two
variables here. I've got variable i on line
eight, and then I'm declaring as an integer
with the value 42. And then I've got this
variable j, that's going to be a floating
point number. Now what I want to do is I want
to actually treat it as a floating point number
and assign that value to J. So the way that
I do that is using this conversion operator.
So if you look on line 12, it looks like float
is being used as a function. And in fact,
it is. And this is a conversion function.
So when I run this program, you see that the
first print statement on line nine, prints
42, as an integer, the second print statement
still prints the same value 42. But now it's
been coerced into being a floating point number,
they have to be a little careful with this.
Because if you go the other way, so for example,
if we go from a float 32 to an integer, and
then I convert that and run it, it looks like
everything's okay. But keep in mind, a floating
point number can have a decimal on it. So
now I've actually lost information to the
conversion. So the important thing about this
is I have to explicitly convert, because if
I just tried to do this, then I'm actually
going to get a compile time error, because
go is not going to risk the possibility of
losing information through that conversion.
So you have to do an explicit conversion,
when you're changing types. That way, it's
your responsibility to understand if you're
losing information or not. Now, the other
thing that's important to know is if I decide
to work with strings, it's a very common use
case, to try and convert an integer into a
string, say, for example, you want to print
it out to a log file. Well, if I run this,
I get a pretty odd result. The first line
prints out Okay, 42. And that's an integer,
that's okay. But then I get an asterisk. That's
of type string, what the heck happened there?
Well, in order to understand that, you have
to understand how strings work with go, a
string is just an alias for a stream of bytes.
So what happens when we asked the application
to convert the number 42 into a string is
it looks for what Unicode character is set
at the value 42. And that happens to be an
asterisk. So if you want to convert back and
forth between strings and numbers, then you're
actually going to need to pull in the string
conversion package, which you can find on
go Lang under packages. If you scroll down
a little bit, you see string conversion here.
And this is going to expose all sorts of functions
that are going to make it a lot easier to
convert back and forth between strings and
other data types. So in this case, what we'd
want to do is use the string conversion packages
I to a function, which converts an integer,
that's the I two, that's the two and then
to an ASCII string. So if we go ahead and
run that, now you see that it properly converts
the integer 42 into the string 42, and prints
it out for us. So if you need to work with
converting between numbers and strings, then
go ahead and use that string conversion package.
But if you're converting between numeric types,
just keep in mind, you can't implicitly do
that conversion, you have to explicitly do
it. And if you need to do that, then you can
go ahead and use the type as a function. Okay,
so we just covered quite a bit of ground.
So let's go through a summary of what we've
talked about throughout this video.
Okay, there's quite a few things to keep in
mind as we're working with variables. So let's
go through and review what we talked about.
The first thing that we talked about is the
three different ways to declare variables.
So we saw that we could declare a variable,
and then initialize it later, we saw that
we can declare it and initialize it at the
same time. And then we also saw that we can
use this colon equals syntax as a shorthand
version of declaring and initializing a variable.
And then we let the compiler decide what type
to assign to that. Now normally, you're going
to use this third version, the only time you're
really going to use the second version is
when the compiler is going to guess wrong.
And then the first version is sometimes useful.
If you need to declare the variable in a different
scope than you're actually going to initialize
it. We then talked about how we can't read
declare a variable. So within the same scope,
we can't initialize that variable twice, but
we can continue to reassign values to it,
but we can shadow them. So if we declare a
variable in a package scope, for example,
we can read declare that in a function scope,
and that's going to shadow the variable at
the higher level of scope. All variables must
be used in a go application. So if you declare
a local variable, and that variable isn't
used in the scope that it's declared or one
of its inner scopes, then that's going to
trigger a compiler error. And you're going
to have to go back and clean that up before
your application is going to run. And again,
the reason that that's really nice is as code
evolves, and it continues to be refactored
and improved over time, and features get retired,
you don't have all these old variables hanging
around and requiring allocations of memory
when they're not being used for anything anymore.
We also talked about the visibility rules.
The first thing that you need to know is when
you're working with package level variables,
a lowercase first letter means that it's scoped
to the package, which means all of the source
files that are in the same package have access
to that variable. If you have an uppercase
first letter, then it's going to be exported
globally, and so anything can work with that
variable at that point. There is no private
scope. So you can't scope it. variable to
the source code itself. However, you can scope
a variable to a block by declaring it within
the block instead of declaring it at the package
level. We also talked about the naming conventions.
And there are really two naming conventions
that are used Pascal case, which basically
means you uppercase, the first letter, and
camelcase. So when you're naming variables,
you don't want to separate the words in the
variables with underscores. You don't want
to have them all in lowercase, you don't want
to do anything like that. Just use standard
Pascal or camel casing rules. The only exception
to that is if you're working with acronyms,
all of the letters in the acronym should be
uppercase. The names of the variables should
be as short as you reasonably can get them.
So you've got a very short lifespan of the
variable, say, for example, a counter in a
for loop, then having a one letter variable
name is perfectly acceptable. However, if
you've got a variable that's got a longer
lifespan, say, for example, it's used in a
fairly long function, or if it's exported
from the package, then having a longer more
descriptive variable name is certainly something
that you should consider. However, please
don't go crazy. Keep those names as brief
and concise as possible. And the last thing
we talked about are the type conversions and
how these work a little bit differently than
other languages, a lot of other languages,
you would have to put the type in params,
and then what you want to convert, in NGO,
it acts more like a function. If we want to
convert an integer to a floating point 32
number, then we use float 32 as a function,
and we pass the integer into it, and it's
going to do the type conversion for us, we
also learned that go does not do implicit
type conversion. So if you try and take a
floating point number and assign it to an
integer, goes going to throw a compile time
error for that. And that's because of the
possibility of losing information through
that conversion. So every time you're going
to do a type conversion that might lose information,
you're going to have to do that yourself so
that you're making the decision. And then
you can write whatever tests are required
in order to make sure that information hasn't
lost. The final thing that we learned is when
we're working with strings, then type conversions
can start to get a little bit weird. So in
order to handle the conversion between integers
and strings, and other data types in strings,
we can use that string conversion package
that offers a series of functions that make
sure that the conversions happen the way that
we expect them to. In today's video, what
I want to do is introduce the primitive types
that we have available in the go language.
Now, we're not going to be talking about every
basic type that you can create. There are
certainly collections and some more complicated
types. And we'll introduce those a little
bit later. Today, I want to focus on three
categories of information that we can store
and go. We'll start by talking about the Boolean
type, then we'll move on to the numeric types.
And in that category, we have integers, floating
point numbers and complex numbers. And then
we'll move on to the text types. Okay, so
fairly simple agenda, but we've got a lot
to cover. So let's go ahead and get started
by talking about how we can work with boolean
data in go. boolean data is probably the simplest
type of data that we can work with and go.
And it represents two states, you either have
true or you have false. So in order to show
you a simple example of working with Boolean
variables, we can create a variable here and
make it of type bool. So that's the data type
that you're going to use when you're declaring
a Boolean. And we can set it equal to A values.
So for example, we can set it equal to true,
and then we can go ahead and print out using
our
fancy printf statement here, we can print
out the value and type of this Boolean. And
if we run that, we see that the Boolean true
is in fact got the value true. And its data
type is Boolean. So we can also initialize
this to false, and run that. And now we see
false is also a Boolean. Now there's a couple
of uses for Boolean variables in our applications,
perhaps one of the most common is to use them
as state flags. So for example, say you're
creating an application and you want to store
whether a user is signed up for notifications
when a report is generated. Well, you can
use a boolean variable in order to store true
if they want that report or false if they
don't. The other case. And perhaps the more
common case for using Boolean and go is as
a result of logical tests. Now, we're not
ready to talk about logical tests quite yet.
But I can show you how Boolean 's are used
in those tests. So if we create a simple variable
here, and we use the equals operator to test
if one equals one, and then create another
variable, and then I want to test if one equals
two. Now, the double equals operator is called
the equals operator. And that's basically
checking to see if the item on the left is
equivalent to the item on the right, so one
obviously equals the number one, and one,
just as obviously doesn't equal the number
two. So if we print out the value of those
using these two printf statements, then we
see that a Boolean is actually generated as
a result of this equivalency test. Now when
we get into talking about logical tests, we'll
see that there are actually quite a few other
logical tests that we can use. But this is
a very common use case that we have. So we
see looks like I need to add a new line operator
here, we see that the first operation does
in fact, generate the Boolean true and the
second operation generates the Boolean false.
Now the other thing that's important to know
about the primitives is that every time you
initialize a variable, Ingo, it actually has
a zero value. So we're assigning the value
of n and m in this example here, but what
happens is If I just do this and print out
the value of that, well, in some languages,
that would be uninitialized memory, and we
would have no control over what printed out,
when go, every time you initialize a variable,
it has a zero value in the zero value for
Boolean is the value false. So you don't have
to worry about initializing variables every
time. If the zero value is acceptable to you,
you can certainly leave it like that. So Boolean
is a pretty simple. The next type that I want
to get into are the numeric types. And these
are a little bit more complicated, because
of all of the different types of numbers that
we can work with in our applications. Go has
a rich array of numeric types to choose from.
Now, the first thing that we need to know
about is the zero value. And the zero value
for all numeric types is going to be zero,
or the equivalent of zero for that numeric
type. So let's start talking about the integer
types. So the first type of integers that
we can work with are the signed integers.
And those have several different data types.
So we have the general int, which is an integer
of unspecified size. And I say unspecified
because every platform can choose to implement
it as a different size. Now, the one thing
that you're guaranteed is regardless of your
environment, and it will be at least 32 bits,
but it could be 64, or even 128 bits depending
on the system that you're running on. And
this is going to be the default integer type.
So if we do something like n equals 42, and
then we print out the type of n, then you
see that we get the value 42. And it's of
type integer. Now, there are other types.
So we can have eight bit integers, which can
range from negative 128 to 127. We can have
16 bit integers, which can go from negative
32,007 68, up to 32,007 67, then 32 bit integers,
which can go from approximately negative to
positive 2 billion. And then if you need a
really big number, you can go with 64 bit
integers. And those go somewhere between plus
and minus nine quintillion. So if you need
bigger numbers than that, then you've got
a very large application that you're working
with. And in that case, you're going to need
to look into the big package from the math
library, which can handle arbitrarily large
numbers. So you can't get a number big enough
for the big package to not be able to handle.
Although working with numbers at large, you're
going to take a bit of a performance hit and
the numbers aren't going to be quite as easy
to work with is using the primitive types
that we're talking about here. Now related
to the signed integers are the unsigned integers.
So we have the value 42 here, and just so
you can see, we can create an unsigned integer.
And I'll just pick at you and 16 and assign
that the value of 42. And then let's go ahead
and run that. And you see that now we have
a un 16. So there's an equivalent type of
unsigned integer for every signed integer,
we have you int eight, which is an unsigned
eight bit integer which can go from zero to
255. We have a 16 bit unsigned integer and
a 32 bit unsigned integer. Now, what we don't
have is we don't have a 64 bit unsigned integer.
But we do have a type byte. And a byte is
an alias for an eight bit unsigned integer.
And the reason we have that is because the
unsigned eight bit integer is very common,
because that's what a lot of data streams
are used to encode their data. Now with
these integer types, and again, unsigned unsigned
integers are basically the same type, we've
got several different arithmetic operations
that we can do. And these are built into the
language. So if I just dropped in this example,
here, you see that we've got an integer, a
set equal to 10. And we've got another integer
be set equal to three. And we're doing the
basic arithmetic operations that are available
to
us.
So we can add, we can subtract, we can multiply,
we can divide, and then this percent sign
here is actually used for the remainder. So
if I run this, you see that we get 10, plus
three is 1310, minus three is seven, and so
on. So we get the numbers that we expect,
then the one that you might not expect is
this a divided by b. So 10 divided by three
is three, remainder one. And so we get the
result three out, because when you divide
an integer by an integer, you have to get
an integer result. So the type cannot change
during the operation. So when we do this,
we're doing what's called integer division,
and we dropped the remainder. Now, if the
remainder is interesting, that's what this
remainder operator is for. And then we can
pick up that remainder one out of it. Now,
just like when we're doing division, we can't
change the type. So dividing an integer by
an integer can't give us a floating point
number, for example, we're also not allowed
to add to two integers of different types.
So if we take this as an example, we've got
the integer, a set equal to 10, and an eight
bit integer set equal to three. And if we
try and add those together, we're actually
going to get an error. So even though go might
be able to do that, theoretically, it's very,
very insistent that it's not going to work
across types without your consent. So in order
to make this work, we would actually have
to do a type conversion on one of the variables
to convert it into the type of the other.
So just like we talked about in the last video,
where go is very, very hesitant about implicit
data conversion. This is another example.
Even though these integers are almost equivalent,
go is not going to make that assumption for
you, you're going to have to do the type conversion.
Now a couple of other operations that we have
are called the bit operators. So if I drop
in this example, we see the full Bit operators
that we have, we've got the AND operator,
we've got the OR operator, we've got the exclusive
OR operator, and we've got the and NOT operator.
Now what's going to happen when we run this?
Well, let me just run this first and get these
results. So you see that if we take a and
b, then we get two, if we take a or b, we
get 11. And these might not make a lot of
sense. So in order to clear things up a little
bit, let me put in the binary representation
of these. And then we can walk through what
these are doing. So 10 is 1010, in binary
three is 0011. Now when we run into an end
operation, that's going to look for what bits
are set in the first number and the second
number. So as we can see, we've got four bits
in each one of these numbers that are allocated.
Actually, these are 32, or 64 bits long, but
I'm ignoring all the zeros at the beginning
of these numbers. So let's look at the four
digits that matter. So if we look at these,
then we see actually, if we add these together,
we're going to get 0010. And in binary, that
is two, so 10, and three equals two. Now if
we do the or, or means if one or the other
is set, so we get one, because a has the first
bit set, neither one has the second bit set,
both have the third bits set, so we're going
to include that, and then B has the last bit
set. So we'll have that. So now we end up
with 1011, which is one plus two plus eight,
which equals 11. Exclusive OR means either
one has the bit set, or the other does, but
not both. So in that case, we're going to
do 1001. The only difference between this
and the OR operation is that third bit where
they're both set to true. And therefore we're
not going to include that. Now in the end
not that's kind of the opposite of or because
within not, it's going to be set true only
if neither one of the numbers have the bit
set. So since the first bit is set in a, we're
not gonna include that, neither one has the
second bit set, so we're going to include
that both have the third bit set, so we're
not going to include that. And B has the fourth
bit set. So we're not gonna include that.
So we get 0100, which is equivalent to the
number eight. And that's how these bit operations
work. The last example that I have to show
you with integers is what's called bit shifting.
So when we have this example here, the first
print statement is going to bit shift a left
three places. And the second is going a bit
shift a right three places. So let's run this
and see what that's going to do. And so we
get to number 64, and one, so in order to
understand that, let me go ahead and put in
these values, so we can understand what's
going on. So eight is really two to the third
power. And when we do bit shifting, we're
basically adding to that exponent, as long
as we're dealing with the power of two, because
really, what we're going to do is we're going
to take this to to the third and multiply
it by two to the third, which is equivalent
to two to the sixth, and two to the six is
248 1632 64. So that's how we get the 64.
Now, when we bit shift to the right, we're
going to take our original number, and we're
going to divide it by two to however hard
we're shifting, so we're going to divide it
by two to the third. And in that case, we're
going to get two raised to the zero power.
And any number greater than zero raised to
the zero power is one.
And so that's how those operations work. The
next data type that I want to talk about are
the floating point types. So we have a lot
of different integer types. So we can store
a lot of different size numbers. But with
integer types, we can only store integers,
so they can be positive or negative integers
or zero, but we can't store decimal numbers.
So in order to store decimal numbers in go,
we're going to use the floating point numbers.
Now the floating point numbers in go follow
I triple E 754. Standard. And in that standard,
we're going to pull out two of the types.
So we've got 32 bit floating point numbers
and 64 bit floating point numbers. So if you're
working with a 32 bit floating point number,
you can store numbers between plus or minus
1.18 times 10 to the negative 38, all the
way up to 3.4 times 10 to the 38. So from
very small numbers to very large numbers.
If you need even more precision than that,
then you can use a float 64. And that can
go from plus or minus 2.23 times 10 to the
negative 308th, all the way through 1.8 times
10 to the 308. So how do we create floating
point numbers? Well, here's some examples
of how we can do that. So line eight here
shows you how you're going to define your
flooding point literals almost all the time.
So we're going to declare a variable and set
it equal to 3.14. And away we go. This next
line here shows that we can use exponential
notation. So we can use 13.7 times 10 to the
72nd. And that's going to be able to use the
short form iE 72nd to stand for that 10 to
the 72nd. So if I run this, we're actually
going to get the final result here, of 2.1
times 10 to the 14th as a floating point 64.
But notice we didn't get any errors. So all
three of those declarations, syntaxes are
okay, so that's how we can work with floating
point numbers and show you how you can explicitly
declare these We can use, let me just do var
and float 32, for example, and initialize
that. And that's how you're going to declare
a floating point number. Now unfortunately,
this number is a little big, because we can
only go times 10 to the 38th power. So if
I comment that line out, things are going
to run properly. If I come back in and make
this a floating point 64, then we can restore
this number. And that's another thing that's
important. If you're going to use the initializer
syntax on a decimal, it's always going to
be initialized to a float 64. So keep in mind,
you can't do arithmetic operations between
float 64 and float 30 twos. So if you're just
using the initializer syntax, you're going
to want to make sure that everything's working
as float 64. And if you forget, don't worry
about it, the compiler will complain at you,
and you can quickly go in there and make sure
that everything's working properly. Okay.
Now, speaking of arithmetic operations, let
me jump in a couple of those. And you can
see the arithmetic operations that are available
with floating point numbers. So if I run this,
we get the expected answers of adding, subtracting,
multiplying dividing two numbers together.
Now, a couple things to notice here, when
we divided A by B, we did in fact get a decimal
result, because as long as we're working with
floating point numbers on both sides, we can
get a floating point result. As a matter of
fact, we have to get a floating point result.
The other thing to notice, we don't have the
remainder operator available that is only
available on the integer types. Further, we
don't have the bitwise operators or the bit
shifting operators. So if you need to work
with those, you're going to have to work with
the integer types. The last type of numeric
primitive that we have available in go is
the complex type. And this is really kind
of exciting because this is fairly rare in
the languages that I've worked with, where
complex numbers are actually treated as a
first class citizen, and it opens up go to
be used as a very powerful language for data
science. So if we come in and paste an example,
you can see a very basic declaration of a
complex number. Now there are two types of
complex numbers. There's complex 64, and complex
128. And the reason we have that is we're
basically taking a float 64 plus a float 64,
or a float 32 plus a float 32 for the real
and imaginary parts. Now here, I've got a
very simple complex number, that's one plus
two I, if I go ahead and run that, you see
that in fact, it prints out as one plus two
I and that's complex 64. So goes parser understands
the I literal as an imaginary number, and
it uses that when you're creating your variable.
Now we can actually go even simpler than that,
because AI is considered special. And we can
run this with just two AI and we get zero
plus two I down here and the result. Now what
operations that we have available. Well, we
can do addition, subtraction, multiplication,
and division again. So I've got two complex
numbers defined here. If I run this, then
I get the expected result, where the real
parts are added together, and the imaginary
parts are added together, or subtracted, multiplied,
divide whatever operation we're applying.
Now, what happens if you need to decompose
this down. So if I come back to our first
example, here, where we have one plus two
I, not every operation that I'm going to do
with these numbers is going to need this to
work as a complex number. So what happens
if I need to get at the real part or the imaginary
part? Well, in order to do that, we actually
have two built in functions in the language.
So let me wrap this in here with a call to
the real function. And then I can
follow that up with its partner, which is
the image function. And what those are going
to do is those are going to look at the complex
number that you provide. And they're going
to pull out the real part or the imaginary
part. And these functions work with complex
64 and complex 128. So if you run this on
the complex 64, then the real and the image
function are going to give you float 30 twos
out, if you run this on complex 128, it's
going to give you float 64 is out because
those are the data types used for the components.
So if we run this, we see that we get float
32 is out. If we convert this to a 128 and
run this again, then we're going to get float
64 is out. And it's going to break apart that
complex number into the real and imaginary
part. So we can work with those however, we
need to know the complement of these two functions
is the complex function. So if you're working
along in your program, and all of a sudden
you need to make a complex number. How do
you do that, because you can't use this literal
syntax. So in order to do that, we do have
another function. And that's the complex function.
And this takes two numbers. The first number
is the real part. And the second number is
the imaginary part. So let me go ahead and
wipe out this line. Get rid of these real
calls here, and then run. And now that we
see that we can take two floating point numbers.
In this case, they're considered to be floating
point 60 fours because we're making a complex
128. And it creates five plus 12 I for us,
the last data type that I want to talk about
is the text type. And texting go falls into
two basic categories. One, I can talk a lot
about the other we're just going to touch
on. So the first text type that we have available
is a string, and a string. Ingo stands for
any UTF eight character, so that makes it
very powerful. But that means that strings
cannot encode every type of character that's
available. For that we need the other text
type which we'll talk about in a second. But
let's just start by introducing a basic example
here. So here I've got a string literal, this
is a string, I'm going to print out its value
and its type. So if I go ahead and run this,
you see that this is a string print out. And
it's of type string. No big surprise here.
Now one of the interesting aspects of a string
is I can actually treat it sort of like an
array. Now, we haven't talked about arrays
yet. But I can actually treat this string
of text as a collection of letters. So if
I do something like this, I'm actually going
to ask it for the third letter, because arrays
and go are zero based. So I'm going to look
for the 012. That's the third letter in the
string, which is the letter II. So if I run
this, I get an interesting result, I get the
value 105. And that's a un eight. So what
the heck happened there? Well, what's happening
is that strings and go are actually aliases
for bytes. So we can go ahead and convert
this guy back, since a byte is just an alias
for a string, and we can get our letter I
back. Now, strings are generally immutable.
So while I can inspect the second character,
I can't do something like this, if I tried
to run this program, let me just print out
the full string here and run this, then I
get an error. And there's actually quite a
few things wrong with this. The first thing
is I can't assign a string to a byte because
I'd have to do a conversion. The second thing
is I can't manipulate the value of the string.
Now with the numeric types, I should do that
there were quite a few operations that we
can perform with it, there is one arithmetic
or pseudo arithmetic operation that we can
do with strings, and that is string concatenation.
Or in simpler terms, we can add strings together.
So in this example, I've got the string s
and the string s two. And as you can see down
in the printf statement, I'm adding s&s two
together, and then we're going to print out
the value in the type. So if I run this, you
see that it just merges all the strings together,
and it gives us the result. Now another thing
that I can do with strings is I can actually
convert them to collections of bytes, which
in go is called a slice of bytes. So in this
example, I'm starting with a string, this
is a string, and then I'm going to do a conversion
to this collection of bytes. And I'm going
to pass the string into that. So if we run
that, we actually get this as a string comes
out as the ASCII values, or the UTF values
for each character in that string. And then
you see that the result is a collection of
UN eights, which is a type alias for bytes.
Now, why would you use this one? It's a very
good question. A lot of the functions that
we're going to use in go actually work with
byte slices. And that makes them much more
generic and much more flexible than if we
work with hard coded strings. So for example,
if you want to send as a response to a web
service call, if you want to send a string
back, you can easily convert it to a collection
of bytes. But if you want to send a file back,
well, a file on your hard disk is just a collection
of bytes, too. So you can work with those
transparently and not have to worry about
line endings and things like that. So while
in your go programs, you're going to work
with strings a lot as strings. When you're
going to start sending them around to other
applications or to other services, you're
very often going to take advantage of this
ability to just convert it to a byte slice.
Okay, the last primitive data type that we
have to work with is called a rune. Now a
rune is a little bit different than a string
type in go. Because we're a string type represent
any UTF eight character, a rune represents
any UTF 32 character. Now, UTF 32 is a little
bit of a weird animal, because while any character
in UTF, 32, can be up to 32 bits long, it
doesn't have to be 32 bits long. For example,
any UTF eight character, which is eight bits
long, is a valid UTF 32 character. So there's
all sorts of tricks that they have to do in
the encoding of the characters in order to
know whether the character is one, two or
four bytes long. So that makes things a little
bit tricky to work with and go. Now we're
not going to get too deep into this subject,
we're just going to talk a little bit about
what runes are. And then I'm going to point
you to some things that you can refer to if
you actually need to work with rooms in your
application. So if we look at this example,
here, we're declaring the room a. Now notice
the difference here, if we were declaring
a string, we would have double quotes. When
we're declaring a single room, we use single
quotes. But if I run this, I'm going to get
an interesting result. Notice I get the value
97. And it's an int 32. Now that might seem
a little weird. And the reason for this is
because runes are just a type alias for int
30. twos. So we're strings can be converted
back and forth between collections of bytes.
Rooms are a true type alias. So when you talk
about a rune and go it is the same thing as
talking about an integer 32 name, I think,
well, that's just because we're doing some
implicit initialization here, we're using
that colon equals syntax. So let's specifically
and explicitly declare this as a rune and
try this again. And we get the same result.
And again, that's because a rune is an integer
32. Now, you might be feeling a little lost
here. So if I've got a UTF 32 characters at
how do I work with that. Well, the Answer
comes from the go API's. So if I jump out
to go lang.org, come into the packages. And
let me just jump to the strings package. And
then I'll show you this. Notice this function
here, read rune. So if you're working with
a data stream that's encoded in UTF 32, then
you have special functions that you're going
to be able to take advantage of, that's going
to return those values out. So if we do read
byte, which is going to read a single character,
then we're going to get a bite out and a potential
error. But with read rune go is going to look
at the byte stream, it's going to pull off
the next room that's available to you the
size of that room, and then a potential error.
So you're going to have all the information
you need in order to re encode that integer
32 that you're going to have back into its
UTF 32 character. So things are a little bit
more tricky when you're working with runes.
And you're going to have to read into the
API's for the go package that you're working
with, in order to understand how to work with
them in your application. Okay, so that covers
the primitive data types that you have to
work with and go, let's go into a summary
and review what we've talked about in this
video.
We covered a lot of ground in this video,
and I understand that it might take a little
bit of time to process this and really understand
all the different options that you have for
primitive data types and go. Now before we
get into the summary, I do want to let you
know that a lot of times the default data
types that you're given are going to be perfectly
fine. So if you're working with Boolean, you're
going to get a Boolean type, if you're working
with integers, you're going to get that signed
integer type floating point, it's going to
give you a floating point, 64, and so on.
So you don't have to memorize every single
data type. If you need a specific data type,
then you can certainly refer to the NGO documentation
in order to find out what's available for
you. So let's go through and review what we
talked about. The first thing that we talked
about was the Boolean type of data, we found
out that it can take two values true or false.
And it's not an alias for other types. So
in some languages, a Boolean is actually an
alias for an integer. So you might use like
negative one for true and zero for false when
go Boolean is its own type. So you can't convert
back and forth between integers and things
like that, you're going to have to work with
Boolean as their own type. We also talked
about the zero value for a Boolean is the
value of false. And so if you initialize a
Boolean and don't set a value for it, it's
going to receive the value false. Then we
talked about the numeric types. And the first
type that we talked about were the integer
types. And that broke down into two different
types with the signed integers. And there
are two classes, I guess you could say within
the sign integer type. There's the INT type,
which has varying size, but a minimum of 32
bits. And this is going to be the most common
type of integer you're going to deal with
in your applications. But if you need a little
bit more granularity, or a little bit more
resolution, or control over how much memory
is assigned to the integer, then you can go
all the way from int eight, which is an eight
bit integer all the way up to 64 bit integer,
we also have the unsigned integers where the
signed integers have a plus or minus and so
they can't store numbers quite so large because
they have to store a plus or minus bit. The
unsigned integers can store larger numbers,
but they can only ever be positive. And we
have all the way through an eight bit which
we can use the byte or the UN eight, type
four, all the way through 32 bit unsigned
integers with the un 32. We have various arithmetic
operations that we can perform on both integer
types. So we can do addition, subtraction,
multiplication, division, and that remainder
operation. So remember, division with integers
is going to give you an integer result. So
you're going to lose that remainder portion.
So if you need that, you can use that remainder
operator to get it. We also have the bitwise
operators. So we can do and or Exclusive OR,
and the and not operations. And the zero value
for any integer type is going to be the literal
value zero. So when you initialize an integer
type, and don't assign a value to it, that's
going to be equivalent to the value zero,
you're not just going to get whatever was
in memory when that variable is initialized,
and you cannot mix types in the same family.
Now, this is going to be true throughout all
of the numeric types. If you have a un 16,
for example, and a un 32. And you cannot add
those together, you're going to get a compile
time error. The next numeric type that we
talked about where the floating point
numbers,
so they follow the I triple E 754. Standard,
there's zero value is similar to the integer
types, the value is zero. And we have two
different versions, we got 32 bit versions
and 64 bit versions that we can work with.
And we have several different literal styles
that we can use to initialize them. So we
can use a pure decimal like 3.14, we can use
exponential notation, for example, 13 e 18,
or two e 10. And it doesn't matter if that
e is upper or lowercase, or you can do mixed.
So for example, 13.7 e 12 is a perfectly acceptable
way to initialize that. We do have addition,
subtraction, multiplication and division that
we can do with floating point numbers. Now
we don't have the remainder operation, but
the division operation is going to give us
a true floating point result. So we're not
going to lose our decimal portion. The final
numeric type that we talked about were the
complex numbers. The zero value of a complex
number is zero plus zero I and they come in
64 and 28 bit versions and the reason for
that is the two components, the real and the
imaginary component are either going to be
floating point 32 or floating point 64. So
when you add those together, that's where
you get the 64 and 128 bit versions. We have
Some built in functions that we can work with.
So we can use the complex function in order
to create a complex number, we can use the
real function in order to get the real component.
And we can use the match function in order
to get the imaginary component of a complex
number. Now what the data type that comes
out of that depends on the size of the complex
number going in. So complex 64 is going to
give you a float 32 out from the real in the
match function and a complex 128 is going
to give you a float 64 out of the real in
the match function, we have the same arithmetic
operations as we do for floating point numbers,
we can do addition, subtraction, multiplication
and division. The final category of primitive
data that we talked about, or the text types,
and in go, there are really two different
text types. The most common one that you're
probably going to deal with are strings. No
Strings are represented as a collection of
UTF eight characters, they're immutable, you
cannot change the value of a string after
it's been initialized. You can concatenate
strings together with the plus operator. And
then you can convert them back and forth between
a collection of bytes with this square bracket
byte syntax and passing in the string that'll
convert it to a collection of bytes. And you
can convert a collection of bytes back to
a string by using the string conversion. The
other type we talked about is a rune and a
rune represents any UTF 32 character. Now
runes are a little bit more complicated to
work with because of the multi step process
that it takes in order to encode a character
into the UTF 32 character set. So when we're
working with runes as a primitive type, really
all we're working with is an alias for an
integer 32. Today, I want to talk about constants
and how you can use them in your NGO applications.
Now, there are several things that we need
to talk about with constants. So like we've
been doing, I want to break this down into
several categories. The first thing that I
want to talk about is how we're going to name
constants in our NGO applications. Then we'll
talk about type constants, followed by a discussion
about untyped constants. And we'll talk about
the differences between those two, and the
options that each one gives us. And then we'll
talk about a method of generating constants
that are called enumerated constants. And
finally, we'll end our discussion by talking
about enumeration expressions, which are going
to build upon the concepts that we're going
to talk about in that first enumeration discussion.
The first thing that I want to talk about
is how we're going to name our constants.
So all constants are going to be preceded
with the const keyword, that's going to let
the compiler know that that's what we're trying
to work with. Now, if you've come from other
languages, you might be expecting that we're
going to name our constants, something like
this, where we're going to have all uppercase
letters and separate the words with underscores.
The problem with that is if we do that and
go, then the first letter is going to be uppercase.
And as you remember, from our discussion on
variables, if we've got an uppercase first
letter, that's going to mean that the constant
is going to be exported. And we don't always
want that. So instead of this, we're actually
going to name our constants the same way that
we named variables.
So if we had a variable that we wanted to
call my const, and we didn't want to export
it, then we would start with a lowercase first
letter, or in other words, we would use camel
casing. And if we did want to export this
symbol, then we would simply change that first
character to uppercase. Now assuming that
we're going to be working with an internal
constant, then we're going to switch this
back to a lowercase first letter. And then
let's talk about how we can create what's
called a typed constant. Now a typed constant
is created very similarly to a typed variable.
So we can start with the const keyword, then
the name of our constant, and then we're going
to list the type of the content, and then
we can set it equal to a value, then if we
want to prove that that worked out the way
we expected it to, then we can go ahead and
print out the value in the type of the constant.
And we will do that by using this printf statement
here. And then when we run this, we see that
the constant is in fact created. It's got
the value 42 that we assigned, and it's got
the type that we assigned to it. Now the reason
it's a constant and not a variable is it has
to remain constant. So if we tried to do something
like this, change this to the value 27, then
the compiler throws an error, because we're
not allowed to change the value of a constant.
Another characteristic of a constant is that
it has to be assignable at compile time. So
for example, if I wanted to have a constant
that represented the sine of pi over two,
then I might be tempted to do something like
this. I'll create a float 64 constant. And
I'll set it equal to the result of the sine
function from the math library. And I'll pass
in 1.57, which is approximately pi over two.
And then I can run this right? Well, the problem
with that is in order to determine the sine
of that value, that actually requires the
function to execute, which is not allowable
at compile time. And so you can't set your
constants equal to something that has to be
determined at runtime. And that includes things
like setting it equal to flags that you pass
into your application, when you run, if you're
going to do that you can't use a constant
to store that value. Now constants can be
made up of any of the primitive types that
we talked about in the last video. So if we
have this example, here, we've got an integer
constant, we've got a string constant, a floating
point constant and a Boolean constant. And
if we run this, we see that all of those printout
exactly the way that we expect. We've got
the integer the string, the floating point
value and the boolean value. Now in an upcoming
video, we're going to talk about the collection
types and the collection types. are inherently
mutable. So for example, you couldn't create
an array and declare that to be a constant
type. Arrays are always going to be variable
types. Now another characteristic that constants
have in common with variables is they can
be shadowed. So if we create a constant at
the package level, and let's just make this
an integer 16, and set it equal to the value
27, then we'll delete these guys. And also
these guys. Now we've got a constant called
a declared at the package level, that's an
integer 16. And then we got a constant in
the main function, that's also called a and
it's an integer type. So if we update This
printf statement to print the type of variable,
we see that the looks like I need to print
my variable twice, we see that the inner declaration
of the constant wins. So not only can we change
the value of the constant, but we can also
change the type because the inner constant
shadows that outer constant. And we can prove
that by commenting this line out, running
again. And we see that the package level constant
wins. So you want to be a little careful here,
because if you're going to reuse constant,
it's going to feel like those values are changing.
So I wouldn't recommend that you take advantage
of this. But if you do get into a situation
where constants aren't evaluating the way
that you expect them to, this is one possible
reason. Now when we're working with constants,
they work very similar to variables when we're
using them in operations. So if we bring this
line back, and set it equal to 42, and then
what I want to do is declare a variable. So
we'll declare a variable b as an integer,
and set that equal to the value 27. And then
we can do a plus b. And let's see what happens
when we do that. So if we run that, we in
fact, get the ability to add a constant to
a variable, and the result is going to be
a variable. And so since the constant and
the variable are of the same type, we can
perform the addition operation on there. Now,
our constant is of a different type. For example,
if we made variable b in 16, and run this,
then we get exactly the same failure that
we get when we try and add two variables of
different types together. Now, so far, all
we've been talking about are these type constants,
we're after the constant name, we list the
type. But we don't have to do that, we can
use the compilers ability to infer the type
for us. So let's just go ahead and do that
with this example here. When we run this,
we see that the constant a is inferred to
be an integer with the value 42. Now given
that, given that the compiler is inferring
the value, what do you think is going to
happen? If we do something like this, if we
restore that previous example, where we're
going to add this constant to an integer 16?
Well, in fact, in this case, the operation
succeeds, which might be a little bit confusing.
But the reason that works is because what
the compiler is actually doing, when it sees
this constant is it's basically replacing
every instance. So the way the compiler sees
this program is it sees it like this. So since
we're taking a literal 42, and adding an int
16 to it, that 42 is interpreted as being
an integer 16. So the compiler doesn't say,
oh, constant, a equals 42, that's an integer
and always an integer. Instead, the compiler
is going to look for every time that we use
the symbol a, and it's going to replace that
with the value of the constant. And so we
can do these implicit conversions when we're
working with constants, which is something
that we can't really do when we're working
with variables. The next thing that I want
to talk about are what are called enumerated
constants. So let me go ahead and start that
conversation out by wiping out what we have
here, clean up our code just a little bit.
And then I'm going to do this at the package
level. Because this is where I've seen these
most commonly applied, you could do these
in a function level, if that made sense in
your application. So I'm going to declare
a constant a, and I'm going to have that as
an untyped constant. And I'm going to set
it equal to this special symbol called Iota.
So when I run this, you see that a is evaluated
to have the value zero, and it's inferred
to have the type integer. So what is Iota?
Well, Iota is a counter that we can use when
we're creating what are called enumerated
constants. So in this example, having an enumerated
constant isn't terribly valuable. But one
of the things that I can do with constants
is I can actually work with them in a constant
block like this. So when I'm doing this, I
can create another constant set that equal
to Iota and another constant and set that
equal to it, let's go ahead and clean up this
because we already know what the type is going
to be. So we don't need to be printing that
out. And then let's print this command out
two more times, switching to B, and C. So
now we're using Iota three times and when
we get the result we actually see Iota is
changing its value as the constants are being
evaluated. So the first constant that's assigned
has the value of zero than one and then to
know another special feature that we can take
advantage of with Iota is that if we don't
assign the value of a constant after the first
one, then the Pilar is going to try and infer
the pattern of assignments. So in this example,
we would expect to have an error because B
and C don't have a value assigned. But since
we've established a pattern for how to name
the constants in this block, when we run,
we actually get the same result. And that's
because the compiler is going to apply the
same formula. So it's going to apply b equals
Iota and C equals Iota for us. Now that value
of Iota is scoped to that constant block.
So we create another constant block. And in
this case, we create a constant called a two
and set that equal to Iota, copy this line,
bring it down, and print out the value of
a two, then what we're gonna find is Iota
resets to zero. So Iota is scoped to a constant
block. And what that lets you do is you can
actually create related constants together,
ensure that they have different values. And
then if you have another set of related constants,
you can start another constant block and ensure
that they have unique values, but allow duplication
between the values in one constant block in
another. So what's an example where you might
use this? Well, let me just drop in this simple
application. And what we're doing here is
we're setting up a constant block, where maybe
we're trying to store the specialty of veterinarians
in a veterinarian clinic so that our narine
could be a cat specialist or a dog specialist,
or maybe we can take his neck specialist to.
Now as you can see, inside the cost box, I'm
setting the cat specialist equal to Iota.
And then in the main block, I'm creating a
variable and setting its value equal to cat
specialist. So if I check to see if the specialist
type is a cat specialist, then I in fact,
get the value true. Now, that works just fine.
And this also works if I, for example, use
a dog specialist, assign that specialist type
to be a dog specialist run that, then that's
going to work out just fine. So everything
looks really good here, right? And this is
a very common use for enumerated constants.
However, one thing
that I would warn you about is what happens
if I declare this variable and don't initialize
it to a type? Well, if I check to see if it's
dog specialist, I get false, which makes sense.
But remember, what is the initial value of
Iota? Well, the initial value of Iota equals
the zero value for an integer. And so in fact,
even though we haven't specified a specialist
type, it does show up as the value can't specialist.
So what do we do about this, so there's a
couple of approaches that we can take here.
The first is to use the zero value of the
constant as an error value. So we can set
this equal to error, then we don't need this
statement anymore. And now when we check to
see if the specialist type is a cat specialist,
we get the value false because cat specialists
is equivalent to the integer value one, which
is no longer the zero value of the integer.
This is a very valuable approach, if you want
to check to see if a value hasn't been assigned
to a constant yet, so you can specify an error
specialist. And then you can check to see
if that value is set equal to the zero value
of that constant. And if it is, you can handle
that error,
because
presumably, you expect that to be initialized
in some way. Now, if your application guards
against that, and there's no reasonable way
for this to happen, then you can take advantage
of this underscore symbol, which is goes one
and only write only variable. Now what's the
value of a write only variable? Well, with
Iota, we have to have a zero value, we always
have to start with zero. But if we don't care
about zero, then we don't have any reason
to assign the memory to it. So we can use
this underscore symbol. And we'll see this
in quite a few places in our go applications.
And basically, what that tells the compiler
is yes, I know you're going to generate a
value here, but I don't care what it is go
ahead and throw that away. So if we run our
application, again, everything works just
fine. But in this case, we can't actually
get at the zero value of this constant block.
Now the ability to create it lists of enumerated
constants with a Oda is very valuable. But
things don't actually stop there. And the
reason is, remember, the value of a constant
has to be able to be determined at compile
time, but there are some operations that go
is going to allow us to do for example, we
can do addition. So if we do this and run,
then we get false again. But what happens
if we print out the value of kept specialist
if we do that, and we're going to have to
remove this line, then in fact, that expression
got evaluated. So the first line line eight
is evaluated to Iota plus five, which is zero
plus five, the next line cat specialist, Iota
increments, and the formula repeats. So cat
specialist is equal to the value six, dog
specialist is seven, and snake specialist
is eight. So this can be valuable if you need
some kind of a fixed offset. Now a common
use case for this is to use the bit shifting
operators because anything that we can apply
to our primitive type, we can apply here as
long as it's not a function expression. So
we can do addition, subtraction, multiplication
and division, we can do remainder operations,
we can do the bitwise operations. And we can
do bit shifting, which is one of the more
interesting use cases that we can take advantage
of. And the reason is because we don't have
the ability to raise two powers because raising
two powers and go is a function in the math
package. So we can't do that in our constant
evaluations. But by bit shifting, we can raise
things to the power of two, because every
time you shift the number one level, you're
actually multiplying it by two. So we have
this example here. And I actually stole this
from the effect of go article on golang.org.
So what we have here is we have an example
of a constant block that's giving you constants
that are equivalent to kilobyte, megabyte,
gigabyte, terabyte, petabyte, and so on. So
down here, in our main program, what I've
done is initialize the file size to some arbitrary
value. And then I've got this printf statement.
And this is basically going to format a result
to print two decimal places, and then the
literal string GB afterward. So this string
here is basically saying I'm expecting to
format a floating point number, and I'm going
to give it two decimal places, this GB is
a literal GB, that's going to be printed in
the result. And then we've got the value that's
going to be used to fill this in. And that's
going to be file size divided by the GB constant.
Now you notice this constant block is set
equal to one, and then we're going to bit
shift that value 10 times Iota. So the first
time we're going to bit shift 10 times one,
so we're basically going to multiply this
by two to the 10th. And then we're going to
multiply by two to the hundreds for the megabyte,
and then two to the 1004, gigabyte, and so
on. So when we run this, we get a really convenient
way to format an arbitrary file size into
a human readable format. And in the effective
go article, it actually shows you how to put
a switch block, which we haven't talked about.
So you can make a decision about which constant
you're going to use based on the size of the
incoming value. So here, we get this nice
way to format this relatively difficult number
to read to be the very easily read 3.73 gigabytes.
Now another thing that can be very valuable
to do is using bit shifting in order to set
Boolean flags inside of a single byte. So
if I paste this example in, we can see an
example of that. So let's just say that we've
got an application and that application has
users and those users have certain roles.
So inside of this constant block, here, I'm
defining various roles that we can have. So
for example, you might be an admin, you might
be at the headquarters or out in the field
somewhere, you might be able to see the financials
or see the monetary values. And then there
may be some regional roles. So can you see
properties in Africa, can you see properties
in Asia, Europe, North America, or South America.
So in order to define these constants, what
I'm doing is I'm setting the value to one
bit shifted biota. So the first constant is
admin is one bit shifted zero places, so it's
a literal one, the second one is one bit shifted
one place, that's two, and then four, and
then eight, and then 16, and so on.
So what I have is each one of these constants
is going to occupy one location in a byte.
So down here in the main program, I'm defining
the roles in a single byte. And I'm oaring
together is admin can see financials and can
see Europe now if you remember, oaring, is
going to be set to true if one of the values
is true, or the other one. So his admin has
the binary representation of 0000001. I think
that's enough zeros, seven zeros, followed
by one can see financials is going to end
up with 100, can see Europe is going to end
up with the value 100000. And so when we order
those all together, we're going to get this
byte that has these three flags set to true.
So when we run this, we see that we've encoded
eight access roles for user into a single
byte of data. So we're able to store this
information extremely efficiently. So if I
want to see for example, if this user is an
admin, I can go ahead and print his admin,
and then print out the value. And then in
order to determine if that's valid or not,
then I can do a little bit of bitwise mathematics
here. So I can take the constant is admin,
and that with the roles, and what that's going
to do is that's going to apply what's called
a bit mask. So only the bits that are set
in the is admin constant, and our roles are
going to be left as true, which means if we're
an admin, we're going to have the value one
set at that first bit. And then I can compare
that to the is admin constant. So when I run
this, if we have the admin role, then we're
going to get the value true. Now, if I check
something that I don't have the role, so let
me go ahead and copy this down. And then let's
just see if they're at the headquarters, so
we'll put that in here. And it's exactly the
same bitwise operations, we're just changing
our mask. If we run this, we see that is headquarters
equals false Actually, let me put in my Line
return here, and then run this again. And
you see that is headquarters equals false.
So we can very quickly and very efficiently
store a lot of different information about
what roles and access rights a user might
have, and a simple byte. And having this constant
defined with a numeration expression makes
it really fast and really efficient and really
clear in our application. Okay, so let's go
into a summary and review what we've talked
about in this video. constants are another
one of those foundational elements, that is
going to be a part of almost every application
you're going to write. Now, the first thing
that we learned about with constants is that
they're immutable, but they can be shadowed.
So we can create a constant, we cannot assign
a new value to it. But if we create a constant
on an inner scope from an existing constant,
then not only can we change the value, but
we can even change the type, because that
inner scope is going to shadow the outer scope
constant, they have to be replaceable by the
compiler at compile time, so the value must
be calculable. So we're not gonna be able
to access functions or command line arguments
in order to determine the value of the constants
in our application. But we are going to be
able to do simple expressions like we talked
about in the enumeration section. They're
named like variables. So if you want to export
the value of the constant outside of your
package, then you're going to use Pascal casing.
And if you want to leave it as an internal
value to the package, then you're going to
use camel casing to name that constant. Type
constants work just like immutable variables.
So you can use them in arithmetic operations,
you can pass them into functions, but they
can only interoperate with the same type untyped
constants have a little bit more flexibility.
So they work just like the literals. So if
you replace that constant throughout your
application with the literal value of that
constant, that's how it's going to work. So
that's going to allow us to interoperate with
similar types. So we had the value 42 defined
as an untyped constant. And we could add that
to an integer 16, we could add that to an
integer, we can add that to a un 16. Any of
those would work, because the literal 42 will
work in all of those cases. Then we talk about
the enumeration types that we can work with.
And we learned about the special symbol Iota.
That allows us to start with as values zero
and increments one time every time we use
it inside the same const block. Now the one
thing that we have to watch out for is that
constant values that match the zero values
of variables can cause subtle bugs in your
application, because you might have logic
that you expect it to initialize the value
of the constant. And if something happens
and then initialization doesn't occur, then
you're going to be working with zero value,
which might give you a false match to a constant
that you're evaluating
against. Using that Iota operator, we can
actually create what are called enumeration
expressions. So we can define the value of
the constant dynamically by combining Iota
with any arithmetic bitwise operation, or
bit shifting operation that's allowable with
the primitive type that the constant and representing,
I want to talk about the first two collection
types that we have available and go arrays
and slices. Now, arrays form the basis of
slices. So I want to start a discussion with
those. And when we talk about arrays, we're
going to talk about how to create them the
built in functions that go offers us to understand
what's going on with our arrays. And then
we'll do some exercises working with arrays
and see how we can use those in our applications,
then we're going to follow the same pattern,
but we're going to switch over to slices.
So we'll learn the various ways that we can
create slices, we'll learn the built in functions
that we can use to understand what's going
on with our slices. And then we'll do some
exercises working with those. Okay, so let's
go ahead and get started by learning how to
create an array. So the first thing that I
want to discuss about arrays is the use case
for them. Why do we need them and what are
they used for? So let me just drop in an example,
let's just say that we're building an application
that's going to work with the grades of students
in a class. So with that arrays, we're going
to end up with an application something like
this, we're going to have maybe grade one,
grade two, grade three, and then we can print
out those grades. So we can go ahead and run
this. And we see that we get the scores 9785
and 93 printed out. Now this works sort of.
But we got a lot of problems here, because
our application needs to know exactly how
many grades we have to work with, at the time
that we're designing the application. And
working with these grades as a collection
becomes very cumbersome. So enter the array,
and that's going to solve all of our problems.
So in order to see what an array looks like,
let's go ahead and delete this code here.
And then we'll create an array, that's going
to hold the grades for us. Now the way we
declare an array is we're going to start with
the size of the array. So we're going to use
square brackets and then we're going to have
an index that's going to be the number of
elements that are array can hold, and then
the type of data that the array is going to
be designed to store. So an array can only
store one type of data. So in this case, we're
declaring an array of integers that can hold
up to three elements. If we wanted to hold
a different type, say we want them to have
an array of strings, then we would type this
to a string, and so on. So you have to specify
at the time that you're declaring the array,
what type of data you're going to store. And
then we can use this initializer syntax To
put in the values for our array, so we can
put in the same scores that we had before
9785, and 93. And then, if we come into our
print statement here, and add our grades as
what we're going to print, then we see that
we have all of the grades printed out together
in this collection called an array. Right
now, that's a convenient collector. As we
start getting into looping constructs and
things like that, we're going to really find
that having things grouped into arrays and
slices and the other collection types is a
very powerful way for us to work with our
data. Now, another advantage that we have
with working with arrays is the way that they're
laid out in memory. So if you declare three
different variables and specify their values,
it's impossible to know how they're going
to be laid out by the go runtime with arrays.
However, we know by the design of the language
that these elements are contiguous in memory,
which means accessing the various elements
of the array is very, very fast. So by collecting
our data together in arrays, not only is it
easier to work with, but it also makes our
applications generally a little bit faster.
Now one problem that we have in this example
here is if you look at it, we're actually
declaring the size of the array twice, because
we have this syntax here, where we're saying
that we're creating a three element integer
array, but then we're adding three elements
to it. And that's not really required. If
you're going to be initializing an array literal
like we're doing here, then you can actually
replace the size with these three dots here.
Basically, what that says is create an array
that's just large enough to hold the data
that I'm going to pass to you in the literal
syntax. So in this case, we're going to get
an array that has three elements in it. And
that's implied by the fact that in this literal
syntax, we've passed three integers to it,
we can also declare an array that has a certain
size, but has its values zeroed out, by doing
something like this, if we declare an array
called students, and let's make that a three
element array that's going to hold strings.
And then let's print out what we have in that
array. So if we print out, students, make
sure I'm spelling everything correctly and
run this, then we see that we have an array
that's empty. So we have declared a three
element array that can hold strings. But obviously,
there's no elements in there right now. So
in order to specify a value in the array,
we're going to use this syntax, so we're going
to call upon the array, and then we're going
to tell it which index we want to work with
within the array. So in this case, we're working
with the zeroeth index of the students array.
And then let's just assign the name Lisa to
it,
then we can go ahead and print out our array
again, and run it. And now we see that we
have, I always forget to add this line return
here, then we see initially we have an array
of students that's full of empty strings.
In the second instance, we've actually specified
that first element. Now you may be wondering
why we're starting with the value zero. And
the reason is related to how arrays are made
up of contiguous blocks of memory. So when
we talk about students as the name of the
array, what go is going to do is it's going
to have a pointer or it's going to remember
the location of the beginning of that array.
And then the index that we pass in this case
zero, is going to tell it how many strings
to walk forward. So it knows that when it
has a string, a string has a certain length.
And so it's going to walk that many strings.
So when we pass zero, it's going to be the
head of the students array moved forward zero
string elements. And so that's going to be
the first element of our array. So we can
finish this example out, if I drop some code
in here, we can see what it would take to
fill out this array. So in this case, we got
the zeroeth element to Lisa, the first element
is Ahmed. And the second element is Arnold.
So if we print that out, we see the expected
result, where we have Lisa, Ahmed and Arnold.
And it doesn't matter what order we work with
these, if we flip these around, then we find
that they do flip around in the array, we
can assign them in any order that we want.
Now if we want to get add a specific element
in the array, then we can use this square
bracket syntax again, and dereference the
element from the array. So if we do this,
and then change our label again. So we're
going to get the second element of the array,
which is index one, then we can go ahead and
run this. And then we see that the second
element has the value of Arnold. So we can
use this square bracket syntax in order to
assign values to the array, as well as to
pull out the values that have been assigned.
Now another thing that we can do is we can
determine how big the array is. Now, obviously,
we created the array up on line eight. So
we remember at design time that we created
this, but there may be a situation where you
need to go back and review the size of the
array that you're working with. And the way
that we can do that is using the built in
length function. So if I drop in another print
statement here, and format that, you see that
we can get the number of students in array
using this built in alien function and passing
in the array. So if we run this, then we see
that we get the number of students equals
three and that's going to print out the size
of the array. So if we change the size of
the array to say five then the results of
printing The array isn't going to change,
but the size of the array does. Now one thing
that's important to remember is that an array
can be made up of any type, it just always
has to be the same type for a given array.
So we've been working with arrays of integers
and arrays of strings. So we've been working
with primitives. But this example here shows
that we can actually make up arrays have anything
else. So in this case, we've got an array
of arrays. So let's just say that we're working
with some linear algebra. And we need the
identity matrix, which is a concept that's
used pretty often in linear algebra. So this
array here stores a three by three identity
matrix. So the first row is going to hold
the values 100, the second row is going to
hold 010. And the third row is going to hold
001. So if we go ahead and print this out,
then we see that we do in fact, get those
values. Another way to look at this, and maybe
a little bit easier to see is using this way
here. So we're just going to declare the array
of arrays, and then we're going to initialize
each one of those rows individually. So this
reads a little bit cleaner, and might be a
little bit easier for you to understand what's
going on. And if we run this, we get the exact
same result. Now the last thing that I want
to talk about with arrays is something that's
a little bit different with arrays and go
than in other languages. And that is that
arrays are actually considered values. So
in a lot of languages, when you create an
array, it's actually pointing to the values
in that array. So if you pass things around,
you're actually passing around the same underlying
data. But in go, that's not true. When you
copy an array, as we're doing on line nine,
here, you're actually creating a literal copy.
So it's not pointing to the same underlying
data is pointing to a different set of data,
which means it's got to reassign that entire
length of the array. So if I run this, you'll
see what I'm talking about here. So on line
eight, I assigned an array on line nine, I
created another variable b and assign that
to a, and then on line 10, I changed the second
element of the array to the value five. And
what you see is that when I print out the
array, it has the original values 123. But
B has the new values of 153. So when you're
working with these, you have to be a little
careful, because copying arrays, especially
when we get into functions, if you're passing
arrays into a function, go is going to copy
that entire array over. So if you're dealing
with a three element array, that's not a big
deal, if you've got a million elements in
your array that could slow your program down
a little bit. So what do you do if you don't
want to have this behavior? Well, we haven't
talked about it yet. But I want to give you
a hint right now in order to cover this completely.
And that is this idea of pointers. So the
way that our program is working right now
is that the value B is assigned to a copy
of the array. But if we do the address of
operation, which is this character here, then
what we're saying is B is going to point to
the same data that he has. Now we'll get into
more detail about what this means later. But
the long and the short of it is if I run this,
now, A and B are pointing to the same data.
So A is the array itself, and B is pointing
to a. So when we change the value in line
10, we're actually changing the same underlying
data for both. So when we print them out,
we see that the array has changed, as well
as the array that B is pointing to, because
they happen to be exactly the same array.
Now arrays are very powerful. And there's
a lot of use cases where you can use arrays
very efficiently. However, the fact that they
have a fixed size that has to be known at
compile time definitely limits their usefulness.
So in go, the most common use case for using
arrays is to back something called a slice.
So let's take a look at a slice. So the first
thing that I want to do is comment out a couple
more items in this example here. So we'll
comment on this one, this one and this one.
And then we'll change this over to slice syntax.
So the way we're going to do that is simply
by eliminating these three dots here. So a
slice is initialized as a literal by just
using the square brackets, the type of data
we want to store. And then in the curly braces,
we can pass in the initialized data. So we
go ahead and run this, we see that we get
the values 123, it looks exactly like an array.
And as a matter of fact, everything we can
do with an array we can do with a slice as
well, with one or two exceptions. So in order
to illustrate that, we have the length function
that we talked about with an array, well,
we have the length function with a slice as
well. So if I run this, we see that we do
get the length of three. So we initialize
the slice with values 123. So with three elements,
so the length function gives us a value of
three. Now there's an additional function
that we have available with slices, and that
is the capacity. And that's because the number
of elements in the slice doesn't necessarily
match the size of the backing array, because
the slice is really a projection of that underlying
array. So we can have a very large array and
only be looking at a small piece of it. Now
if we run this example, we see that the capacity
function returns the value three. So the underlying
array is exactly the same size as the slice.
But as we go along here, we'll see how we
can get into situations where the length and
capacity are different, and why that's a very
good thing.
Now unlike Like
arrays, where we have this syntax here, and
we have to use this address of operation in
order to point to the same data slices are
naturally what are called reference types.
So they refer to the same underlying data.
So if we run this example, again, remember
when we ran this with an array, we saw that
B store different data than a when we were
done. So if we run this, we see that A and
B are actually pointing to the same underlying
array. And so when we change the value in
B, we get a change in the value in a. So this
is one thing that you're going to have to
keep in mind when you're working with slices.
If you got multiple slices pointing to the
same underlying data, you have to keep in
mind, if one of those slices changes the underlying
data, it could have an impact somewhere else
in your application. Now, so far, we've only
looked at the literal syntax for creating
a slice. And that's what we're seeing here
on line eight, there's actually several other
ways that we can create slices. And that is
illustrated with this example here. So you
see on line eight, we're creating a slice
that has the values one through 10. And then
on line nine, we're creating a slice B, and
that's using this bracket with the colon in
between. And what that's going to do is, it's
basically going to create a slice of all the
elements of what it's referring to. So it's
going to create a slice of all of the elements
of a online 10, we're creating a slight C,
and that's going to start with a third element
of the parent, and copy all the values after
that. So that's going to start with the element
with index three, which is, of course, the
fourth element and every element after that,
so this is going to copy four through 10,
into the slice at sea, then on line 11, we're
going to do the other syntax, and that's going
to copy everything up to
the sixth
element. And that's the literal sixth element,
that's not element number seven, that's actually
the sixth element, which is going to have
the index five. And then on line 12, we actually
see an inner slice. So we're going to copy
the fourth element through the sixth element
into our new slice. So let's go ahead and
run this and see what prints out. So we see
the first line printed out is the original
slice that we have. The second line is the
copy of that slice that's copying all of the
elements. The third line is going to copy
the fourth element on so we see the number
four through 10. The fourth line copies everything
up to the sixth element, so we get the values
one through six. And then the last line printed
out is a slice from three to six. And so we're
gonna get the elements four, five, and six
printed out. So that can be a little bit confusing,
because the first number has a slightly different
meaning than the second number. So basically,
the first number is inclusive, and the second
number is XClusive. So for example, if we
look at line 12, again, we're going to copy
from index three, up to but not including
index six. So that's another way that you
can look at it. Now one thing to keep in mind,
remember what I said that all of these operations
point at the same underlying data. So if we
take element five, and change that value in
the a slice and run this again, notice all
of them teams value, because they're all pointing
to the same underlying array. So each one
of these operations includes the fifth index
in their results. And each one of those gets
updated to the value of 42. Now another thing
to know about these slicing operations is
they can work with slices like we're doing
here, but they can also work with arrays.
So if you remember, if I put these three dots
in here, it's actually going to turn a into
an array. And if I run this, we get the same
result. And that's because slicing operations
can have as their source, an array or a slice.
So whatever type of data you're working with,
as long as it's one of those two, you can
use these slicing operations. Now the last
way that we have available to us to create
a slice is using what's called the make function.
And that's a built in function that we have
to work with. So if I delete all this, and
drop this guy out, we're going to use the
built in make function. And this takes two
or three arguments. So let's start with two
arguments. So the first thing we're going
to say is the type of object that we want
to create. So you can use make for several
different operations. In this case, we're
going to be talking about making slices. So
in this example, here, we're going to make
a slice of integers. The second argument is
going to be the length of the slice. So in
this case, I want to start with three elements.
So now let's just get some information about
the slice that we created here. And we'll
do that by dropping in a couple of print statements.
So we'll print out the values of the slice,
the length of the slice and the capacity of
the slice. So they run this, no big surprise
it zeroed out. So when I create a slice, everything
gets set to the zero value, which is what
we always expect in go to happen every time
we initialize a variable, we expect it to
be initialized to zero values. And that's
true for slices just like it's true for primitives.
When we asked for the length, we get a length
three, when we ask for the capacity, that's
also set to three. Now we can also pass a
third argument to the make function, and that's
going to set the capacity. So keep in mind,
the slice has an underlying array, and they
don't have to be equivalent. So if we run
this, we see that we've created a slice of
length three, it's got three elements in it,
but the underlying array has 100 elements
in it. So why would we do that? Well, the
reason is because unlike arrays, slices don't
have to have a fixed size over there and Life,
we can actually add elements and remove elements
from them. So in order to show you an example
of that, let me drop in another example here.
And this is going to start with a slice of
integers that starts with no elements in it.
So if we go ahead and run this, we see what
we expect, we see an empty slice length of
zero capacity of zero. Now, if I want to add
an element to this slice, I can use the built
in append function. So this takes two or more
arguments, the first is going to be the source
slice that we're going to be working with.
So I'm going to start with a and I'm going
to add an element to it. And in this case,
all I want to do is add the number one to
it. And then let's go ahead and print out
the value of the slice the length of the slice
and the capacity of the slice again. So if
I go ahead and run this, we see that in the
second operation, we have a value one stored
in there, we have the length of one, and notice
the capacity is two. So that's kind of interesting.
What happened here is when we initialize a
slice to the value a go assigned a memory
location for the slice. And since it didn't
have to store anything, it basically created
an underlying array of zero elements for us.
As soon as we added an element, obviously,
it couldn't fit in a zero element array. So
it had to assign an array for us. So what
go does is it copies all of the existing elements,
in this case, nothing to a new array that's
got a larger size. So when we reassigned,
it actually did create a new array, this one
has a capacity of
two, and then it put the value one into that
array. Now, when we're dealing with small
slices like this, things are pretty cheap
and pretty easy, even if you're resizing the
array quite a few times. However, as things
get very large, these copy operations become
very expensive. And that's why we have that
three parameter make function. That way, if
we know the capacity is going to be somewhere
around 100 elements, you can go ahead and
start there. And that way, as you're appending
elements and building up the slicer, you're
not constantly copying the underlying array
around. Now, if you remember, when I said
the append function can take two or more arguments.
The reason for that is this is what's called
a variadic function. So everything after the
first argument is going to be interpreted
as a value to append to the slice passed in
the first argument. So if we have this example,
here, we're actually going to append the values
234 and five to the slice returned by A. So
if we run this guy, we see that we get the
elements one through five created there, and
the length is five, like we might expect.
But now the capacity is eight knots not fixed
in stone, how go resize of the arrays. But
generally, what I've seen it does is once
it fills up the underlying array with a slice,
when you add the next element, it's going
to create a new array, and it's actually going
to double the size from the previous array.
So if we start with an empty slice, we see
that the array would initially be of size
zero, then we'll go to 248 1632, and 64 elements.
So that's something else to be aware of, if
you're just over one of those powers of two,
you can actually end up with a lot of memory
consumed that you're never going to be using.
So again, if you have the ability to come
up with a decent first estimate, then that's
going to be beneficial to you. Now one common
situation that you're going to run into is
if you have a slice of elements, and another
slice of elements, and you want to concatenate
them together, so you want to have another
slice created that has all of the elements
of the first slice, and all of the elements
of the second slice. So you might want to
do something like this, if I convert this
over to a literal slice, you might want to
run a command something like this. Well, this
unfortunately, is not going to work. If I
go ahead and run this, you'll see that we're
going to get go complaining to us. And that's
because the second argument to the append
function has to have the type of the slice.
So go can only accept integers here. It can't
accept a slice of integers. But we do have
a way around this. So I don't know what it's
called an NGO in JavaScript, they would call
this the spread operator, where if you have
three dots after the slice, it's actually
going to spread that slice out into individual
arguments. So if we run this, this is going
to work. And it works exactly the same as
if this weren't a slice at all, it's basically
going to take this slice and decompose it
into looking something like this. So these
work exactly the same way. But it's a convenient
feature to know about if you have slices and
you want to concatenate them together. Now,
some other common operations that you might
do with slices are stack operations. So let's
just say that we're treating our slices a
stack, and we want to be able to push elements
onto the stack and pop elements off of the
stack. And things like that, with the append
function is going to allow us to push elements
onto the stack. But how do we pop elements
off? Well, we have a couple of different ways
that we want to do this. If we want to do
what's called a shift operation, which means
we want to remove the first element from the
slice, then we can do this operation here.
And what this is going to do is it's going
to create a new slice that starts at index
one, which has the value two in this example,
and takes everything else from that. So if
we go ahead and print out the value of b,
we'll see that that has the elements two through
five. Now if you want to trim an element off
of the end, then you're going to have to use
a different syntax here. So we want all of
the initial elements. So we're going to start
with a colon, and then we'll use that length
operation, figure out the length of the slice.
But remember, that's going to return the number
that's too large, we actually want to remove
an element off. So let's go ahead and do length
minus one. And this will have the values one
through four in it. So it's pretty easy to
remove an element from the beginning of the
slice or the end of the slice. But what happens
if you want to remove an element from the
middle?
Well, here, things get a little bit hairy.
Because what we have to do is we actually
have to concatenate two slices together, the
first slice is going to be all the elements
up to where we want to remove the element.
So in this case, we can take the first two
elements, by doing a slice of a, and passing
in colon two for this slice that we want to
create, then we have to concatenate to that
all of the element after the index we want
to remove. So in this case, we're removing
that middle element. So we'll take from three
on and then we have to use this spread operation
in order to spread things out so that the
append function is happy. So let's go ahead
and run this and then get my syntax correct
here. And now we see that we've got the elements
124, and five. So we've successfully removed
an element from the slice, they have to be
a little bit careful here. because keep in
mind, we're working with references to the
same underlying array. Because these are all
slicing operations, there's one underlying
array and everything is being done on that
underlying array. So just to show you the
havoc that we've created here, let me go ahead
and print the value of a out here, and then
print the value of a out afterwards and go
ahead and run that. And you see we start out
with the elements 12345. Like we might expect,
we do our slicing operation, removing the
elements from the middle, we get 1245, which
was what we might expect. But then when we
print a out, things look a little weird, because
we have that slice that V represents which
is 1245, our three is completely gone, and
five is duplicated. So this is something to
be very sensitive about. If you're going to
be removing elements from the inside of a
slice using a command like we have on line
10, make sure that you don't have any other
references to that underlying array. Otherwise,
you're going to get some unexpected behavior.
So what do you do if you have a situation
like this, and you really, really need a to
stay the same, and you really, really need
B to change? Well, unfortunately, we don't
have the tools to work with this right now.
Because what we're going to need to do is
to use a loop to create a copy of that slice
that doesn't point to the same underlying
array, and then you can make the manipulation.
So when we get to the looping section, we'll
show you how to do loops. And then you'll
have all the tools that you need in order
to handle that situation. For now, the only
thing I can say is be aware of this behavior.
And if you get into a situation like this,
understand that you're going to have to do
a little bit of research in order to make
sure that your application responds correctly.
Okay, so that covers what I want to talk about
with the raising of slices. Let's head into
a summary and review what we've talked about.
arrays and slices are very common in NGO applications.
And I think you're going to see them all over
the place as you start to work more and more
with the language. So I hope that this conversation
has really helped you understand what arrays
and slices are and some basics about how you
can work with them. We started our discussion
by talking about arrays. And we learned how
there are collections of items with the same
type. So you can't create an array that has
strings and integers and things like that
all of the types have to be the same, but
does collect them all together. And as we
start to get into conversations about looping
and things like that, we're going to find
how we get some very powerful tools that we
can work with, when we're basing our data
on arrays and slices. They are fixed size.
So when you create an array, you have to specify
at compile time how big that array is. And
it can never change. So you can't make them
smaller, and you can't make them larger. There
are three different ways that we can declare
an array, we can do the literal style, like
you see on this first line, where we're going
to specify the number of elements and then
we use a literal that's going to initialize
those elements. However, we do have a shorthand
notation that uses three dots instead of that
first size. And that's going to be a little
bit more robust in your application design.
Because if you run into a situation where
you need to add another literal, you don't
have to remember to update the size of the
array, it's going to update automatically.
We also have this third syntax where we can
declare a zero data array. In this case, we're
going to declare an array of three integers,
each one of those integers is going to start
with the value zero. We also talked about
how arrays are zero based. So we're going
to be counting from the head of the array.
So the first element in the array has the
index zero, the second element has the index
one, and so on. So in this example, if we
asked for the index one of array, we're going
to get the value three out, we have the Len
function that's going to return the size of
the array in case you need to know that some
other place in your application. And you want
to have a way to be able to handle that robustly.
That's not relying on the fact that you know,
at design time how big that array is, you
can use the Le n function to interrogate the
size of the array. Anytime you're moving the
array around, it's going to copy the underlying
data. So if you have a three element array,
and you assign that to another variable, all
three elements are going to be copied to a
new location in memory and you're going to
be working with an independent copy. So that
can cause some unexpected behaviors because
if you change that copied array unexpected
changes to be reflected back in the initial
array, that won't happen. And it can be very
expensive because all that memory has to be
allocated a second time.
Then we moved on to discuss slices and how
they're very similar to arrays. As a matter
of fact, they're backed by an array. So every
slice that you see, under the covers, go has
an array that's holding all of that data for
you. There are several creation styles, we
saw that we can create a slice by slicing
an existing array or another slice, we have
the literal style that we can use, which is
very similar to the array literal, except
for we just leave those three dots out, because
the size of the slice is dynamic. And so it
can be determined at runtime, we also saw
how we can use the make function. So if we
pass two arguments to the make function, the
first is going to be the type of slice that
we want to create. So in this example, we're
going to create a slice of integers. And the
second parameter is going to determine the
length and the initial capacity of the slice.
If we need a capacity that's different than
the initial length, then we can pass a third
parameter into the make function. And that's
going to allow us to specify a capacity independent
of that initial length, the Len function returns
the length of the slice itself, whereas the
capacity function returns the length of the
underlying array. So if for some example,
you want to control the resizing of the slice,
you can go ahead and do that. And use that
capacity to function to understand when you're
starting to get to your limits, you can also
use the append function to add an element
to the slice. And what that's going to do
is it's going to take in a parent slice, and
it's going to take in one or more elements
to add to that slice. Now through the course
of that append operation, you can add elements
that exceeds the capacity of the underlying
array. If that happens, then you are going
to trigger a copy operation. And all of those
elements are going to have to be copied to
a new location. So be aware of that. If you're
dealing with large slices of data, and you
end up resizing, a lot of times your application
performance can suffer, you might want to
think about using that three parameter make
function, in order to set the capacity of
the slice close to where you need it to be.
When you're passing slices around in your
application. Keep in mind that assigning a
new value to an existing slice actually points
to the same underlying array. So if you manipulate
the slice in one location, it's actually going
to affect all the other slices that are pointing
to that same underlying data. So we talked
about an example where we created a slice
and removed the middle element out of it.
And we saw how that actually affected the
initial slice, and could cause some behavior
that we weren't expecting. I want to complete
the discussion, I started in the last video
by talking about the two remaining collection
types that are available and go. And those
types are mapped in structs. So we'll start
our discussion by talking about maps, we'll
talk about what they are, how we can create
them, and then how we can manipulate the data
within the maps, then we'll move on to the
struct data type, we'll talk about what they
are, how we can create them, then we'll move
on to the naming conventions that we're going
to have to be aware of as we're working with
structs, then we'll talk about a concept called
embedding, and how we can use that to have
a struct that we're creating inherit a lot
of functionality from a base struct, then
we'll finish our discussion of structs by
talking about a concept called tags, and how
we can use tags to provide some additional
information about the fields within our structs
to help the consumers of objects created from
the struct get additional information about
how that field is intended to be used. Okay,
so let's begin our discussion by talking about
what maps are and how we can use them. So
the first thing that we're going to need to
get our heads around when we're talking about
maps is what exactly a map is. And I think
the easiest way to show you what a map is,
is by showing you a map. So we have an example
here of a variable called state populations.
And this represents a map of US state names
over to the population within those states.
So what we see here is a map is going to take
some kind of a key, in this case, the state
names, and it's going to map that over to
some kind of a value, in this case, the population
of that state. So what this provides us is
a very flexible data type. When we're trying
to map one key type over to one value type.
Now there's a couple of constraints we're
going to have to keep in mind. As you can
see up in the Declaration on line eight, we're
going to map one key type to one value type.
So all of the keys in this map have to be
of type string, and all of the values have
to be of type integer. Now we can use a lot
of different types for the keys. And we can
use any type for the value. But when we declare
a map, that type has to be consistent for
every key value pair within the map. So if
we run this, we can see an example of what
a map looks like when we print it. And it's
not the best output in the world, but we can
get an idea of what's going on. So we see
that we get the key value pairs printed out.
So we get California, Texas, Florida, New
York, Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Ohio. So
one thing that I just alluded to is that we
have a lot of options with the key type, but
we don't have an infinite number of options.
So the basic constraint on the keys when you're
creating a map is they have to be able to
be tested for equality. Now most of the types
that we're working with can do that. So Boolean
can be tested for equality, all of the numeric
types, strings, pointers, interfaces, structs
arrays, and this thing we haven't talked about
called channels. All of those can be tested
to see if one instance of for example For
a string variable is equivalent to another
one. However, there are some data types that
cannot be used for equivalency checking. And
those are slices, maps and other functions.
So for example, if we create a map called
m, and we'll make that a map of, say we want
to map slices of integers over two strings.
And we'll use the literal syntax for that,
and then we print that out, then you would
expect a map to print out. But in fact, we
get an error because we've got an invalid
key type because a slice cannot be a key to
a map. However, if we had an index here, then
it turns it into an array. And now we do get
a successful printout, of course, the map
is empty. So we don't see anything, we just
see this empty map right here. But we were
successfully able to create the map, because
an array is a valid key type, but a slice
is not. So what are the different ways that
we can create a map? Well, you see, the first
way here, this is the literal syntax, and
this is going to probably be the most common
way you're going to see maps created. So we
just need to declare the type of map. And
we're going to do that using this syntax that
we see here on line eight, where we're going
to start with the map keyword in square brackets,
we're going to list the type of the key, and
then after the square brackets, we're going
to list the type of the value. Another way
that we can do this is we can use the built
in make function again. Now we first saw the
make function when we were talking about slices.
But we can use that once again here. So if
I copy this variable up here, and I set this
equal to the result of calling the make function,
and we're going to tell it what type of map
we want to make. So we're going to use the
map keyword again, the key is type string,
the value is type integer. And now we can
go ahead and remove this colon. And if we
run this, we have to remove our m again from
our print statement. Now if we run it, we
get the same value printed out. So this is
a common way that you can work with maps,
if you don't have at the time that you're
declaring the variable, the entries that you're
going to want to put in it. So for example,
if you're populating the map within a loop,
you might use this syntax. Now another option
that you have with the make is it will take
a second parameter. So if I run that like
this, then that works. However, I wasn't able
to find the intention for this. So this is
available. But it doesn't seem to affect the
length of the map that's created, the map
is always going to be the length of the number
of elements in it, but it might have some
effect under the covers. If you find that
what that's for, please leave a comment down
below. So that I can learn along with you
know, let me go ahead and remove this because
I don't know what it's there for. And I haven't
seen that very commonly used and run this
again. And we can see that we're back to where
our map used to be. Now how are we going to
manipulate the values in our map? Well, the
first thing that we can do is we can pull
out one single value from the map by using
the square brackets and typing in the value
of the key. So the key can be provided either
as a variable or as I'm doing here as a literal.
So if I go ahead and run this, we see that
we get the population of Ohio is 11 point
6 million people. So we can interrogate the
values of our map. Using this syntax here.
We can also add a value to our map using a
very similar syntax. So we call on the state
populations variable. And I add a key. In
this case, let me add the next largest state,
which is Georgia. And it as of 2016, had a
population of 10,310,371. Now I can pull that
value back out, run this. And we see that
we get that value printed out of our map.
If we print the entire map out, we see right
here, Georgia gets added in here. Now, something
you might have noticed, let me do this, I'm
going to copy this print line here, put it
above where we added the Georgia key. And
notice the ordering is different. And this
is going to be a very important thing to keep
in mind as you're iterating through maps later
on,
the return order of a map is not guaranteed.
So even though we declared California, Texas,
Florida, New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois,
Ohio, and then added Georgia, this is not
like a slice, a slice or an array would return
those elements in exactly the same order we
provided them. In a map, everything is stored
in a way that cannot guarantee the order upon
returning. So even though we just added one
entry here, it completely changed how everything
was organized within the map, and we get it
a little bit different output. Now another
thing that I want to show you is that we can
delete entries from the map. So we can do
that using the built in delete function. The
first is the map that we want to delete from,
and then we need to provide the key that we
want to delete. So if we go ahead and delete
Georgia back out, it wasn't there very long.
But if we run it looks like I need to add
my s here. Now if we run it, we see that ga
is no longer part of our map. So we can add
by just calling on the map providing a new
key and value. We can delete using the built
in delete function, and we can interrogate
a value from the map using those square brackets.
Now, an interesting thing about deleting is
if I asked for the value of that key again,
what do you think I'm going to get? So we
see here in the output, Georgia is no longer
part of the map. So you might expect some
sort of error to be raised. Well, in fact,
if I run this We get the value zero out. Now
that should cause you some concern, because
does Georgia have a population of zero? Or
is it missing from our map? Did I just misspell
the key? What's going on? So for example,
if I fat finger, Ohio, and I forget the I
and run this, I get a value zero. Well, did
everybody move out of Ohio? What happened?
What with what we know right now, there's
no way for us to really now. So there's another
way that we can interrogate our map. And that
is using what's called the comma. Okay, syntax.
So with doing what we know, right now, we're
basically doing this, we're calling state
populations. And we're asking for the key,
Ohio, and I'll continue that misspelling.
And then we're printing out the value of that
population variable, and we get the value
zero. Well, we can also add an optional comma,
okay, here. And when we do this, let's go
ahead and add that okay, variable to the output
and see what that's going to do. So notice
that this prints out the value false. So the
okay is false if the key was not found within
our map, but if we add the eye back in and
correct our spelling, we see that we get the
value true out. So if you're in a situation
where you're not sure if the key is in the
map or not, then you can use this comma, okay,
syntax. As a matter of fact, if you just want
to check for presence, then we can use that
right on the operator again, in order to throw
away the actual value. And then we just get
the okay variable printed back out. Now, there's
nothing magic about the variable name, okay.
But it is conventional to use, okay, and you
go programs when you're using it for this
kind of a test. The next thing that I want
to show you about maps is we can in fact,
find out how many elements are in them. So
we can do that using the built in Le n function.
So if I go ahead and run that, we see that
we get the value seven, and we have let's
see 12345 yet we have got seven states declared
in our map right now. So if we added another
state back in, then the length function would
return eight. The other thing that's interesting
to know is that just like slices, when you
have multiple assignments to a map, which
is especially important when you're passing
maps into functions, the underlying data is
passed by reference, which means manipulating
one variable that points to a map is going
to have an impact on the other one, so I can
demonstrate that by creating another variable
called SP, and set that equal to state populations.
And then let's go ahead and delete poor Ohio
out of SP, it always seems to get left out.
And then we can print out SP and print out
state populations. So if I run this, we see
that in our first result, we don't have the
entry Ohio anymore. And then our second
print statement, which is the original map,
Ohio has been removed from there as well.
So if you start passing maps around and you
start manipulating the data within that map,
keep in mind, you can have side effects on
the calling functions or any other place where
that map is referred to. Because manipulating
the map in one place is going to have impacts
on every other place to use. So the final
collection type that I want to talk about
today is called a struct. Now at first, you
might not think of a struct as a collection
type. But go with me on this, if I drop in
an example, we see here an example of a struct.
Now I'm in kind of a doctor who frame of mind
today. So we're going to run with an example
that's talking about some information about
one of the doctors from Doctor Who. So if
I go ahead and run this, we can see that we're
getting information on the third doctor, the
actor's name is john Pertwee, we see some
of his companions listed out here. So the
reason I call this a collection type is look
at the declaration or the struck on line seven
through 11. What we have here is a list of
field names. So we've got number, actor name
and companions as field names, and then a
type associated with that field. So the doctor
number is an integer, the actor name is a
string, and the companions is a slice of strings.
So what the struct type does is it gathers
information together that are related to one
concept, in this case, a doctor. And it does
it in a very flexible way. Because we don't
have to have any constraints on the types
of data that's contained within our struct,
we can mix any type of data together. And
that is the true power of a struct. Because
all of the other collection types we've talked
about have had to have consistent types. So
arrays always have to store the same type
of data slices have the same constraint. And
we just talked about maps and how their keys
always have to have the same type. And their
values always have to have the same type within
the same map. When a struct we can have our
fields describe any type of data that we want.
So we can have structs that contain other
structs, anything that we want. So while in
a lot of ways, structs are the simplest type
of collection that we're going to be talking
about. They're also one of the most powerful.
So we see down here in the main function,
how we can create a struct and I'm using the
declaration syntax, where I'm using named
fields. So we're going to create a variable
called a doctor. And we're going to use this
literal syntax. So we list the type of the
struct doctor, we use the curly braces like
we do with every other literal definition.
And then I have a list of the field names
colon and the value. So number colon three
after name colon, john Pertwee, and then campaign
To set equal to this slice of strings now
notice that when I'm setting something equal
to a slice, I do actually have to tell go,
what kind of collection type, I'm initializing
for that, and then down here on line 23, I
go ahead and print the entire value of the
struct out. And you see that I get the values
printed out, I see three, john Pertwee, and
then the three companions that john Pertwee
had, in his time as the doctor. Now if we
want to interrogate one value from a struct,
then we're going to use what's called the
dot syntax. So if we ask for the actor name
of this struct, then we're going to put a
dot after the variable name, put in the field
name. And when we run this, we see that we
get john Pertwee out. So we can work with
the struct as a whole, or we can start drilling
down. As a matter of fact, we can drill down
through the structure. So if we ask for the
companions, we can get that out, certainly.
But this is a slice like any other slice.
So if I just want the second item in the collection,
I can get Joe grant out by interrogating the
slice that gets returned by asking for the
companions field. Now another way that we
can instantiate our struct is using what's
called a positional syntax. So here, I'm listing
the field names, but it don't have to. So
if I go ahead and take these out, and take
this out, so I print the entire struct out,
then I get exactly the same result as I got
the first time. Now, this is valid go syntax,
I would encourage you not to use it, though.
And the reason for that is it can become a
maintenance problem. So for example, let's
just say that this is our struct, and this
is checked into source control, and everybody's
happy with it. But then let's say we have
a change request Comm. And we're going to
add a list of the episodes that each doctor
appeared in. So that's going to be another
slice of strings. And that gets added right
here.
Well, if we use the positional syntax and
try and run this, we've got a problem. Because
go doesn't know how to map the fields that
we provided into the initializer. Because
there's three values provided in the initializer.
And there's four values in the struct. So
we have to find every place that we have one
of these declared with the positional syntax.
And we have to add, for example, a placeholder
or populated or something. So we go ahead
and run this and everything's working again.
But now, what happens if another change comes
along, and somebody does this? Now they've
changed the order of the fields. When we run
this, everything looks fine. But when I asked
for the doctor's companions, again, I get
an empty slice, because the positional syntax
requires the fields to be declared in the
correct order, much better for us to go ahead
and add in the field names. So let me drop
those in real fast here. Now when I run this,
I get the expected results out. And notice
what the field names syntax, I don't even
have to have it in the same order as they're
declared in the struct go is going to figure
out how to map the data from the initializer
over into the object that's created by using
those field names. The other advantage that
I have is, if I don't have any information
about the episodes at this point in my program,
I actually can ignore the fact that that field
exists. And what this means is I changed the
underlying struct without changing the usage
at all, which makes my application a little
bit more robust and change proof. So while
it is possible for you to use the positional
syntax, I would strongly recommend you do
not use it unless you've got a very short
lived struct. We'll talk about anonymous structs
here in a second. And in those situations,
positional declaration might make sense because
that struct is not going to live for very
long. However, I would strongly recommend
anytime you're taking the time to declare
a type, like we're doing here on line seven,
then you're generally going to be better served
by using field names explicitly instead of
the positional syntax. Okay, the next thing
I want to talk about are naming conventions.
So as you can see, here, I've got my type
declared as Doctor with a capital D, and the
fields declared as lowercase. So the rules
in this situation, follow the rules for any
other variable and go, if we start with a
capital letter, it's going to be exported
from the package. If we start with a lowercase
letter, it's going to be internal to the package.
So in this case, I can work with all of the
fields, because I'm declaring the doctor type
in my main package. And so my main function,
which is also in the main package has access
to it. However, nothing in any other package
would have access to this. So it would be
able to see that there is a doctor struct,
but it wouldn't see any field names. So if
I did want to publish these out, so anything
can use them, I would have to go ahead and
capitalize these field names, of course, or
have to capitalize them in my declaration
as well. And then when I run I get the exact
same result that I got before. So I forgot
to change this variable as well go ahead and
run that, and I get the expected result out.
So generally, we're going to follow the same
convention as we do with any other variable.
uppercase is going to export lowercase is
going to import, you should use Pascal casing
and camel casing, you shouldn't have underscores
and things like that in your field names or
in your struct names. Now if you notice here
on line seven, I have explicitly created a
type called a struct. And that's going to
be a very common way that you're going to
see struct to use. You see you're going to
define a type and then everywhere you need
to use that struct, you can just refer to
it by its type. But we don't have to do that.
And there are some situations where you might
see a program like this. So on line eight,
we're declaring what's called an anonymous
struct. So instead of setting up a type, and
saying, doctor, and that's going to be a struct,
and that's going to have a single field called
name, that's going to take a string. We're
condensing all of that into this single declaration
right here. Now, I can't use this anywhere
else, because it's anonymous. And so it doesn't
have an independent name that I can refer
to it. But I can certainly use this just fine.
So let me go ahead and delete this. And then
notice I'm using the initializer syntax right
here. So we got two sets of curly braces,
it's very important to remember what each
one is doing. So the first set of curly braces
is paired to the struct keyword. And it's
defining the structure of the struct. The
second is the initializer. And it's what's
going to provide data into the struct. So
if we run this application, we see that we
do get the struct with the value john Pertwee
printed out and everything's gonna work just
fine. Now, when are you going to use this,
this is going to be used in relatively few
situations, basically, you're going to use
this in situations where you need to structure
some data in a way that you don't have in
a formal type. But it's normally only going
to be very short lived. So you can think about
if you have a data model that's coming back
in a web application, and you need to send
a projection or a subset of that data down
to the client, you could create an anonymous
struct in order to organize that information.
So you don't have to create a formal type
that's going to be available throughout your
package for something that might be used only
one time.
Now, unlike maps, structs are value types.
So if I take this example here, and let's
just use the same basic manipulation that
we've been doing with all of these collections,
so I'm going to create another struct, and
I'm going to assign it to the value of my
current struct, and then I'm going to manipulate
the value of that name field. So I'm going
to create another doctor called Tom Baker.
And then let's see what happens when we print
both of these doctors out. So as you can see,
even though I copied another doctor from a
doctor, and change the value, the values remain
independent. So a doctor still has the name
john Pertwee, another doctor has the name
Tom Baker. So unlike maps, and slices, these
are referring to independent datasets. So
when you pass a struct around in your application,
you're actually passing copies of the same
data around. So if you've got structs, that
are very, very large, keep in mind, you're
creating a copy every time you're manipulating
this. Now, just like with arrays, if we do
want to point to the same underlying data,
we can use that address of operator. And when
we run this, we have in fact, both variables
pointing to the same underlying data. A doctor
is the struct itself. Another doctor is a
pointer to the struct. So when we manipulate
its name field, we're actually manipulating
the Name field of the a doctor struct. The
next thing that I want to talk to you about
in go is a concept called embedding. Now,
you may have heard in your research on the
go language that go doesn't support traditional
object oriented principles. So for example,
we don't have inheritance, and oh, my goodness,
how am I going to create my program if I don't
have inheritance available? Well, let me show
you what go has, instead of an inheritance
model. It uses a model that's similar to inheritance
called composition. So where inheritance is
trying to establish the is a relationship.
So if we take this example here, if we were
in a traditional object oriented language,
we wouldn't want to say that a bird is an
animal, and therefore a bird has a name a
bird has an origin, a bird has also bird things
like its speed, and if it can fly or not,
go doesn't support that model. But instead,
it supports composition through what's called
embedding. So right now we see that animal
and bird are definitely independent structs,
there's no relationship between them. However,
I can say that a bird has animal like characteristics
by embedding an animal struct in here like
this. So I've just embedded the struct itself,
I haven't provided a name. Now, if I did something
like this, then how to have a named field
in the bird called animal. But I'm not doing
that I'm doing this. So I'm just saying embed
the animal struct right into the bird struct.
Now how can I use this? Well, let me drop
in a new main function here. And then you
can see, so I'm creating an instance of a
bird. And then I'm initializing the variables.
So name is going to be E mu origin is going
to be Australia, the speed is 48 kilometers
an hour, and it cannot fly. So if I print
this out, I see that other than a little bit
of a strange syntax with that inner type,
I see that I have all of my fields defined,
it's a matter of fact, I can come in here
and dig into any one of those animal fields.
And everything worked exactly like I would
expect them to so it kind of looks like bird
is inheriting the properties of animal. But
really what's happening here is there's some
syntactic sugar go is handling the delegation
of the request for the Name field automatically
to the embedded animal type for you. So if
you try and pass these around and look to
see if the bird is a type of animal, it is
not bird is still an issue. Independent struct
that has no relationship to an animal other
than the fact that it embeds it. So it's not
a traditional inheritance relationship where
a bird is an animal. Instead, it's a composition
relationship, which is answering the question
has a, so a bird has an animal, or has animal
like characteristics is how we would say it
in this example. But it is not the same thing
as an animal, they cannot be used interchangeably.
In order to use data interchangeably, we're
going to have to use something called interfaces,
which we'll talk about a little bit later.
Now we can see in this example, that if we
declare the type, and we initialize the variables
afterward, everything's pretty clear, we can
just treat all of the fields as if they're
owned by the bird struct. And we don't have
to worry about the internal structure of the
struct. And that's very intentional. However,
if we're going to use the literal syntax,
we do have to know a little bit about the
birds internal structure. So let me drop in
this code here, clean up our formatting a
little bit, and then remove these lines here.
So this is declaring exactly the same object,
we're going to have an E mu from Australia,
the speed is actually going to be 48 kilometers
an hour, and can fly is going to be false.
But notice what I have to do here, I have
to explicitly talk about the internal animal
struct. So when I'm working with the literal
syntax, I have to be aware that I'm using
embedding. But if I just declare the object
and manipulate it from the outside, I don't
have to be aware of it at all. Now, when should
you use embedding? Well, I will say Generally,
if you're talking about modeling behavior,
embedding is not the right choice for you
to use. When we get into methods, we will
see that embedding will allow behaviors or
methods to carry through into the type that
has the embedding. However, the fact that
we can't use them interchangeably, is a very
severe limitation. Generally, it's much better
to use interfaces when you want to describe
common behavior. So when is embedding a good
idea? Well, if you're offering a library,
for example, and let's just say you're making
a web framework, and you've got a very sophisticated
base controller, in that case, you might want
to use consumers of your library to embed
that base controller into their custom controllers,
so that they can get useful functionality
out of it. In that case, you're not talking
about polymorphism. And the ability to interchangeably
use objects, you're just trying to get some
base behavior into a custom type. And in that
case, embedding makes sense. The last thing
that I want to talk about with structs is
a concept called tags. So let me just drop
in another example program here that we can
work with. This is a simpler version of what
we had before, because we don't need to structs
for this conversation. So we're just going
to have a simple animal struct with the name
of the origin fields. And then what I want
to do is I want to add what's called a tag
in order to describe some specific information
about this name field. So let's say for example,
that I'm working with some validation framework.
So let's just say that I'm working within
a web application, and the user is filling
out a form and two of the fields are providing
the name and the origin. And I want to make
sure that the name is required and doesn't
exceed a maximum length. So I can do that
with a tag that looks something like this.
So the format of a tag is to have backticks
as the delimiters of the tag, and then we
have these space delimited key value pairs.
So my first field is going to be required.
So I'm going to say that the Name field is
required. And then I've got a max length argument,
which in this case, is set to 100 characters.
So the value of the tag is arbitrary, you
could actually put any string that you want
in here, but this is the conventional use
within go, we're going to use space delimited
sub tags. And then if you do need a key value
relationship, then you're going to use a colon
to separate the key and the value. And then
the value is typically put in quotation marks.
So now that we have this, how do we get at
it? Well, the way that we're going to get
at it is using gos reflection package. So
there's no straightforward way from an object
to get at the tags of a field, you have to
use reflection in order to get that, unfortunately,
go makes this pretty easy. So the first thing
that I need to do is I need to get the type
of an object that I'm working with. So I get
that using the reflect packages type of function.
And I have to pass in an object to this. So
I will just initialize an empty animal to
get them that and then I can grab a field
from that type, using the types field by name
method, and then passing in the name. In this
case, I want the name name. And now I can
get at the tag by asking for the tag property
of the field. So if I run this, we see that
I do in fact, get that tag out. Now, what
do I do with that? Well, that's really up
to my validation framework to figure out all
tags do is provide a string of text and something
else has to figure out what to do with that.
So this tags value is meaningless to go itself,
we're then going to have to have some sort
of a validation library that's going to have
to parse this figure out that yes, required
is part of the tag. And then it's going to
have to decide well, if required is there
and then I'm going to apply this logic making
sure the string is non empty or whatever makes
sense in our use case. Okay, so that finishes
up what I have to talk about with maps and
structs. Let's go into a summary and review
what we've talked about. In this video we
talked about the two remaining collections
types that are available and go, we talked
about maps, and we talked about structs. And
when we talked about maps, we learned that
they are collections of value types that can
be accessed by keys, they can be created as
literals, or via the make function, and members
are accessed via the square bracket key syntax,
we can check for the presence of an element
within a map using this comma, okay syntax.
So we can ask for the value at a comma, okay,
and what the map is going to return is the
value type as well as a Boolean, that's going
to indicate if the value was found or not.
Now, if the value wasn't found, your value
variable is going to be the zero value of
the value type in that map. So for example,
if you've got a map of strings to strings,
and the element isn't found, you're going
to get an empty string returned out, if you've
got a map of string to integers, for example,
you're going to get the value zero. If you
have multiple assignments to the same map,
they all point to the same underlying data.
So they're what are called reference types,
which means that if you manipulate the data
in a map in one location, any other variables
that are pointing to that same map are going
to see that change as well. We then went on
to talk about the struct type, and how they're
a collection of disparate data types. So whereas
arrays and slices and maps are all collecting
the same data type together, a struct is unique
in that it collects any type of data together.
So you've got a common field name. But those
fields can point to any valid data structure
within go. They're keyed by name fields, which
generally follow the syntax of any valid variable,
including whether they export it or not. So
if you capitalize the name of the field, then
that's going to be exported from the package.
If you leave it lowercase, then that's going
to be kept internal to the package. They're
normally created as types. But we can create
anonymous structs if we need to. And again,
common use cases for this are very short lived
structs, such as generating a JSON response
to a web service call, that's only used one
time. structs are value types. So if I assign
a variable to an existing struct, then all
of the struct values are going to be copied
over to create a brand new struct. So if I
manipulate a struct in one location, it's
not going to affect any other variables in
your application. We don't have an inheritance
system within go. But we can use composition
using what's called embedding. So when we
want to embed one struct within another, we
just list the type of the struct, and we don't
give it a field name. Go is then going to
automatically interpret that for us and delegate
any calls for fields or methods in the containing
struct down to the embedded struct. If that
top level struct doesn't contain a member
with that name, we
also learned a little bit about tags and how
they can be added to struct fields to describe
that field in some way. So there's a lot of
different use cases. For this. The JSON package
uses this to provide ways to map field names
from NGO field names, which are typically
uppercase to follow JSON conventions, which
are typically lowercase. We also saw that
we can use this, for example, to pass information
into a validation framework. And that framework
could generate errors. If we need fields to
be required, or have rules about their length
or things like that, I want to start a discussion
about the tools that go makes available to
control the flow of execution in our applications.
In today's video, we're going to focus on
two of these tools, the if statement and the
switch statement. We'll start a discussion
by talking about if statements. And we'll
talk about all of the different ways that
we can use them in our applications. And we're
going to specifically focus on the various
operators that are often associated with working
with if statements. And we'll go through what
those are and how you can use them. And then
we'll talk about the relatives of the if statement.
And those are the if else statement. And the
if else if statement. We'll then move on to
talk about switch statements. And we'll start
that conversation with some simple use cases
for switch statements. We'll then talk about
cases with multiple tests, how we can follow
through from one case to another in our switch
statements. And then we'll talk about this
special version of a switch called a type
switch. So let's go ahead and jump in and
start learning about if statements. In order
to start our discussion about if statements,
I want to start as simply as we can. So if
you look at this application here, it's got
just about the simplest if statement that
I could come up with. So we're going to start
with the if keyword as you see here on line
eight. And then we're going to have an expression
that generates some kind of a Boolean result.
And that's actually where we're gonna spend
a lot of time when we're talking about if
statements is how to generate these Boolean
results. In this case, I'm just using the
literal true, which is the simplest Boolean
result that we can come up with. And then
inside of these curly braces here, I've got
the code that's going to execute if that Boolean
test returns true. So in this case, since
we're using a literal true, then the test
is always going to pass. And when I run this
application, I see that I get this test is
true printed out in the results here, if I
change this to a literal false, and we see
that we don't get any output from the application
because the code inside of the curly braces
is not executed. Now, one thing to keep in
mind if you're coming to go from another language,
is you may be expecting this to be valid syntax.
Well, if we try and run this, we actually
are going to get a syntax error because one
of the design decisions that was made with
go is that You're never allowed to have a
single line block evaluated as the result
of an if statement. So you always have to
use curly braces, even if you only have one
line to execute. Now, this style of this statement
has the Boolean test right here. And that's
the only thing after the if clause. There's
actually another style that's very commonly
used in the go language. And that's what I
would call the initializer syntax. So as you
see here on line 17, we've got a call into
a map that's pulling out the value from a
map, and it's pulling out the okay variable.
And then notice I've got this semi colon,
and then the Boolean result listed here. So
this part here, this first part of the if
statement, is the initializer. So the initializer
allows us to run a statement and generate
some information that's going to set us up
to work within the F block. So in this case,
I'm generating a Boolean result by interrogating
the map. And then I'm using that as the test
to see if the code inside the if block should
execute or not, I also have access to the
pop variable that I'm creating right here
inside of the F test, and that variable is
going to be scoped to the block. So if I execute
this, you see that I get the population of
Florida printed out, no problem there. If
I try and work with that variable outside
of here, and printed out again, I'm going
to get an undefined error, because the pop
of variables is only defined within the scope
of that if statement. The next thing that
I want to talk about with if statements are
the comparison operators that we have. I mean,
obviously, as long as we can generate pure
Boolean values, things are going to be pretty
simple. But that's a pretty limited benefit,
because in a lot of applications, we need
to do some kind of a comparison in order to
determine if the branch should execute or
not. So let me drop in this example here.
And let's just say that we're building some
kind of a number guessing game. Now to keep
things as simple as possible. This is going
to be a pretty simple number guessing game,
because we're going to hard code the value
that we're going to guess. And we're going
to hard code our guests. So we're not going
to have a user interface involved here at
all. And we're not going to randomly generate
the number that way, it's very clear what
the application is doing. So right now what
we have is we've got the number that we're
going to try and guess we've got our guests
here on line nine. And then we've got a couple
of tests. So in line 10, we're checking to
see if the guess is less than the numbers.
So this is the first comparison operator that
we're looking at. This is the less than operator,
we also have the greater than operator and
the equality operator. So if we run this with
the guests of 30, and a number of 50, we're
going to get the value to low printed out
because this first test evaluates to true.
And the second and third test evaluate to
false. If I change my guest to 70, and run,
then the second test evaluates to true and
the first and third evaluate to false. And
as you might expect, if I put in a guess of
50, and run this, then I finally got it. So
this is the basics of a number guessing game,
all you need to do is wrap this in loops,
which we'll talk about in a future video and
add a little bit of a user interface and you've
got your first game written in the go language.
Now there's some other operators that we have
available. And it's a little hard to justify
getting them into this example. So I'm just
going to go ahead and dump them here. And
then we can take a look at them. So this first
test is called the less than or equal operator.
So it's going to check to see if number is
less than or equal to guess the second is
the greater than or equal to operator. And
the third is the not equal operator. So if
I go ahead and run this, you see that we are
less than or equal to because we're exactly
on the number we are also greater than or
equal to, and we fail the non equal t test.
So we get true true false printed here, if
we go with 30. Again, we're going to get false
true true. And if we go with 70, we're going
to get true false true. So these are the six
different comparison operators that you're
typically going to use in your applications.
And these work with all numeric types. They
don't however, work with things like string
types. So if you're going to work with string
types, typically what you're going to work
with is the equality operator or the non equality
operator. And that goes for any kind of reference
type as well. Now the next thing that I want
to do in this example is add in some kind
of simple validation. So if you imagine that
we've got some kind of a simple user interface
where the user is asked to enter a number
on the keyboard, and then we're going to use
that as our guests, then we're going to need
some way to validate that number to make sure
that for example, they don't enter negative
five. So to do that, we can add another logical
test. But we can also combine multiple tests
together using what are called logical operators.
So let me drop this code in here. And you
can see our first logical operator. So this
code here is conducting two tests, it's checking
to see if the guest is less than one. Or if
the guest is greater than 100. And if it is,
then we're going to print out a message here,
we can also put a guard around our actual
game code, checking to see if the guess is
greater than or equal to one. And this is
the AND operator less than or equal to 100.
So this first test case is going to execute
if the guess is out of range. So if we enter
negative five, for example, then we're going
to run this and we see that the guests must
be within one and 100. If we enter a number
that's within range, then everything executes
like we expect it to and this code on line
11,000 execute. So this first operator here
is called the OR operator. And this is checking
to see if the test on the left is true, or
the test on the right is true. So obviously,
we can't have the guest less than one and
greater than 100 at the same time, but one
or the other could be true. And if one of
those is true, then we're going to have an
invalid guess. And it makes sense to print
out a message to the user saying that this
other operator that we see here is called
the AND operator. And it evaluates to true
if both the test on the left and the test
on the right evaluate to true. So if we had
a guest, for example of 105, then this code
is gonna evaluate to true because it is greater
than or equal to one. But this code is not
because 105 is not less than or equal to 100.
So with an and test, both cases have to be
true, unlike an or test, we're only one of
the two has to be true. So a guess of 105
is going to print out our error message. And
it is not going to execute the code within
this if statement here. The other logical
operator that we have is called the NOT operator.
And what that's going to do is it's going
to take a Boolean, and it's going to flip
it to the other side. So if I take and just
as a simple example, if I take and print the
value true out, then we're going to get the
value true printed out here at the end of
our program. If I put the NOT operator, which
is just an exclamation point, and run that,
then the true becomes false. Similarly, if
I put this in front of a false, the false
becomes true. And I can just prove that false
is really false
by taking that away, and false is false. So
those are the three logical operators that
we have. We've got the OR operator, which
is the double pipe that you see here on line
10. We've got the and operation which is the
double ampersand, which you see here on line
13. And then we have the knot operation, which
reverses a Boolean result. And that's done
simply using the exclamation point. The other
interesting thing to know about working with
logical operators, is a concept called short
circuiting. So in order to show you that,
I'm actually going to have to jump ahead and
add a custom function here. And we haven't
talked about this. So let me just give you
a simple of an explanation as possible. So
I've got a function down here between line
27 and 30, called return true, that's gonna
return a Boolean result. Now in order to make
sure that we know that it executed, I'm printing
out returning true here, and then I am returning
the true value. So what happens when we call
this function is it's just going to be replaced
with the Boolean true in our application code.
Now, up here in line 10, I've changed our
or test to include this return true. And this
doesn't make sense in our demo example. But
I'm doing this just to show you how this works.
So in this case, we're ordering three tests
together. So what's going to happen is go
is going to evaluate these guys, it's going
to generate a result. And it's going to take
that result, and it's going to order it against
this guy. So basically, it's going to evaluate
all of them. And only one of those has to
be true in order to generate a validation
message. So as you might expect, if we run
this like this, we're going to get returning
true because the guest is not less than one.
So we're going to check this value, this returns
true. And so we're going to evaluate if it's
greater than 100. None of those are truths
or or statement fails. And then we're going
to drop down and we're going to execute this
code down here. Like we might expect, if we
generate an invalid value. So if we put a
negative five, then well, let's just run it
and we'll see what happens. So if we run this,
we get the validation message. The guests
must be within one and 100. Well, that's okay.
But what happened to our return true? If you
remember, this function is supposed to print
returning true out, and it didn't. So what
happened? Well, what happened is a concept
called short circuiting. So as soon as one
part of an or test returns true, then go doesn't
need to execute any more code, it already
knows that the old test is going to pass.
So it does what's called short circuiting,
which basically means it's not going to evaluate
any other part of the or test, it's just going
to move on and say, well, the or test passed,
and therefore everything works. So in this
case, since guess is less than one, there's
no reason for go to evaluate these two tests
here. So since this test is a function call,
it doesn't even execute that function. Now,
if we go the other way, and we go out of range
high, then this is going to return false.
This is actually going to return true because
it's hard coded. And actually go isn't even
going to evaluate this because this is going
to return true. However, this value is going
to fail this test here. So if we run this,
we see that now we get returning true printed
out. So this is a concept called short circuiting.
Go is going to lazily evaluate the logical
tests that we put in here. So when we give
it negative five, since it doesn't need to
evaluate anything after this first test, it
doesn't. So any function executions are not
going to be evaluated. The same thing happens
for an and test. If one of the parameters
returns false, then we're going to get a short
circuiting here. So if we get into a situation
where this is false, go will not even evaluate
this test here. So for example, with the negative
five, when Google evaluates this, it sees
that the guest is not greater than or equal
to one. So the ant test has to fail because
both sides of an ant test have to return true
in order to work and so go is going to exit
early It's not going to execute this code.
So for the next thing that I want to talk
about, I want to actually drop back into our
baseline for our test here. And I want to
talk a little bit about these two if tests.
Now this code obviously works, but it's a
little bit ugly, right? Because we have this
logic here, guess is less than one or guess
is greater than 100. And then we have this
expression here. And this is exactly the opposite.
So this is basically saying, Well, if it's
not less than one or greater than 100, then
do this other thing. So while this code is
perfectly fine, it becomes a little bit of
a maintenance nightmare, because really, our
intent is that we want to execute either this
code or this code. So the way we can do that
a little bit more elegantly and go is by taking
out all of this and just putting in the keyword
else. So what's going to happen in this situation
is it's going to evaluate the logical tests.
If these tests return a Boolean true, then
we're going to print this. Otherwise, we're
going to execute this block here. So in this
case, if we run this, we see that we get the
value too low. And our logical tests down
here in line 21. Execute. If we put in the
value negative five, however, then we get
the same behavior that we had before. But
our code is a lot cleaner, and a lot more
clear as to our intent. Now related to that
is the situation where we have multiple
tests that we want to chain together. And
so let me paste in another permutation of
our little game. And in this case, I've actually
split out the validation logic. So I want
to check if it's less than one, I want to
print out one message, if it's greater than
100, I want to print out another message.
Otherwise, I've got a valid value. And to
do that, I'm using this else if clause. So
basically, what this is doing is it's taking
an IF test, and then it's chaining on another
if test if this fails. And so what goes is
going to do is the first logical test that
passes is going to be executed, otherwise,
it's going to drop down to the else clause.
So with the guests of 30, we would expect
our else clause to fire. So if we run, we
see that in fact it does. If we put in a value
of negative five, then we would expect this
first statement to run and it does. And if
we put in a value that's too high, then we
see that we get the second validation message
printed out. And those are the three different
ways that we have to create if statements.
So we've got the simple if statement, that's
just if and if that evaluates to true, then
the statements inside of the curly braces
are going to execute. We've got if else. So
we're either going to execute the first set
of code or the second set of code. And then
we have the if elsif, which we can chain together
with else in order to have very complicated
branching, so that we can have multiple code
paths execute, depending on how our logical
tests execute. Now one thing to keep in mind
is through these examples, we've never been
able to have more than one code path execute.
So even if we did something like this, if
we did elsif guess is less than one or the
notice both the first test and the second
test will pass with a value of negative five,
however, goes on and go to execute the first
branch that has a succeeding test. So we get
the result, the guests must be greater than
one because this test passed. And so this
test wasn't even evaluated, go immediately
went in and executed this branch of code and
ignored all of the rest of our if statements.
Now another thing to keep in mind when you're
working with equality operators, and this
isn't specific to if checks, but it is something
that's easy to demonstrate with an F check.
So if I take a look at this example, here,
I've got a floating point number of 0.1. And
I'm going to check to see if that number is
equal to the number squared, and then I'm
going to take the square root of it. So if
you get out of pencil and paper, you're going
to take point one squared, which is going
to be point one, and then you're going to
take the square root of that, which is going
to be back to point one, right? So this should
evaluate to true. If we run this, we see that
in fact they are however, if I add in a couple
of decimal places here and run this, now go
says the results are different. Well, the
fact is that if you square a number and take
the square root of it, it is the same number.
So what's going on here? Well, the thing is
go is working with floating point numbers
and floating point numbers are approximations
of decimal values. They're not exact representations
of decimal values. And so we have to be very
careful with them. When we're doing comparison
operations with decimal values, this is generally
not a good idea, the better approach is to
generate some kind of an error value and then
check to see if that error value is less than
a certain threshold. So in this case, since
we're taking a floating point number and comparing
it to a floating point number, what we can
actually do is divided two numbers and subtract
one. And now what we have is a value that's
close to zero. So if we take the absolute
value of that, so we'll use the ABS function,
which does that from the math package. And
then check that to see if it's less than,
for example, point 001. What this is doing
is saying divide these two numbers, and if
they're within a 10th of a percentage of each
other, then we're going to consider them to
be the same. So if we run this, then you see
that the results are the same and we We can
add as many decimal places as we want right
now. And the errors that are associated with
floating point numbers aren't going to get
in our way. Now, this isn't a perfect solution,
because you could get two numbers that aren't
truly the same, and get them to pass this
test. So the key to that is tuning this error
parameter here, making sure that it's sufficiently
small to catch those cases, but sufficiently
large, so that the errors introduced with
floating point operations don't affect your
results. Okay, so the next thing that I want
to talk about are switch statements. So let
me start that conversation by dropping in
an example. And we'll see a basic switch statement.
So a switch statement is a kind of special
purpose if statement. So where if statement
has a logical test and runs a block of code
if that test is true, and then you can add
an elsif to run a second test and another
elsif. And as many else ifs as you want. A
lot of times in application development, we
run into a set of comparison operations that
are very similar to one another. So a lot
of times it's more efficient to use a switch
instead of an if statement. So we have a simple
example here, we're going to use this switch
keyword as you might expect. And in this example,
we're going to start with this value here.
And that's called a tag when we're working
with switch statements. So this is what we're
going to compare everything against, then
we're going to have a series of cases. And
you can see here we got case one, and we got
case two. So what's going
to happen is the value here is going to be
compared to the tag. And if it's true, then
the statements after the case are going to
execute. If not, then they're not going to
execute. And just like with if statements,
the first case that passes is going to be
the one that executes, we also have this default
case down here. And that's going to execute
if none of our other test cases passed. So
if we go ahead and run this, we see that we
get to print it out. If we add the value one
here, we get the value one printed out. And
if we have three, then we get the default
case printed out. So it's a very simple way
to compare one variable to multiple possible
values for that variable. Now in a lot of
languages, if you want to compare against
a range, then you'd have to do something like
this, you'd have case two, you'd have case
three. And then we use what's called falling
through in order to compare multiple cases
together, well, we don't actually have falling
through as a default behavior and go, but
what we do have to make up for that is the
ability to have multiple tests in a single
case. So if I extend this example out here,
and I say this is going to test one, five,
and 10. And this is going to test two, four,
and six, then I'm going to say this is going
to print out one, five, or 10. And this will
print two, four, or six, and then I put in
the value five, and let's just change this
message to this is going to say another number.
Okay, so if I run this, then I get the first
case is going to pass because I matched this
second test. So this is going to execute if
I have the value one, five, or 10. So I can
also get into that same case by passing in
the value of one, if I pass in the value of
four, then like you might expect, I'm gonna
have the second case, evaluate. And naturally,
if I pass in an unknown number, then I'm going
to have the default case execute, just like
I had before with a single test. Now one thing
we have to be aware of is the test cases do
have to be unique. So if I try and run this,
where I'm going to have five in the first
case, and in the second case, that's actually
a syntax error, because you can't have overlapping
cases when you're using this syntax. Now,
just like with if statements, we don't have
to have a simple tag here, in our switch,
we can use an initializer, just like you're
seeing here. Now, in this case, the initializer
doesn't have to generate a Boolean result,
because we're not doing a Boolean test in
our switch statement up here, the Boolean
test is comparing the second parameter in
the switch statement to our cases. So in this
case, we're just going to initialize that
value. So I'm doing some simple math here,
I have set equal to two plus three. So obviously,
that's going to be five, then I've got the
semi colon and the tag that we're going to
be testing against. So as you might expect,
when I run this, the first case executes because
two plus three is five, five is matched by
the first case. And so we get this statement
printed out. Now another syntax that we have
available to us in switch statements is a
tankless syntax. So both of the styles that
we've been talking about, we've always had
a value that we're comparing to our test cases,
where there's actually another syntax, this
tag list syntax. And this is arguably more
powerful than the tag syntax, although it
is a little bit more verbose. So in this case,
on line eight, I'm establishing a variable
which is going to come from some other logic
in my application. And then I've got the switch
statement that standing all alone and immediately
opening a curly brace. So notice, I don't
have a tag here. However, my case statements
now I've got full comparison operations. And
I can use the comparison operators, I can
use the logical operators. So in this case,
the cases are standing in for the logical
tests that we have in our if statements, they're
doing exactly the same job. So in our first
case, I'm checking if i is less than or equal
to 10. And if it is, I'm going to print that
out. And then in our second case, I'm going
to check if i is less than or equal to 20.
And then of course, we've got the default
case. If The value falls through. So if I
run this, I see that I do get the code executing,
which is an interesting thing. And it executes
the first case. Now, why is this interesting?
Well, if you notice the first case, in the
second case overlap, because 10 is less than
or equal to 10. It's also less than or equal
to 20. So unlike the tag syntax, we've got
multiple test cases. And I said they cannot
overlap. When we're using this tag list syntax,
they are allowed to overlap. And if they do,
then the first case that evaluates to true
is going to execute. Now another thing that
I should have pointed out earlier is notice
that we don't have curly braces around this,
any statements that after this case, and before
the next case is going to be part of the block
that's going to execute, so I can have as
many statements as I want here. The delimiters,
in this case, are the actual case keywords,
the default keyword, or the closing brace,
so any of those delimit the end of a block
in a case statement. Now again, if you're
coming from another language, then this syntax
might be looking a little weird, because you
might be looking for this word coming in here.
And we'll have to add this word here. And
we'll have to have this word here.
So you might be wondering where the heck are
my break keywords, one go, the break keyword
is actually implied, because so many use cases
for switches have breaks in there. And forgetting
a break is the cause of innumerable errors
when working with switch statements, the design
decision was made to have an implicit break
between our cases, instead of an implicit
fall through which most other c based languages
have. So what happens if you do in fact want
your case to fall through. So in this example,
let's just say that we do want to print out
that we're less than or equal to 10, and that
we're less than or equal to 20. And we know
that if we pass this first case, we're going
to pass the second case to, in that case,
we can actually use the keyword fall through.
So if I run this, you see that both messages
print out. So I'm going to get less than or
equal to 10 and less than or equal to 20.
Now one thing to keep in mind here is fall
through is logic less. So when we say fall
through to the next case, it will do that.
So if I, for example, change this to be greater
than or equal to, then we know that I fails
the second case, but if I run, it still executes,
because fall through means that you are taking
the responsibility with the control flow.
And you intentionally want the statements
in the next case to execute. Now and go you
don't use follow through very often, because
we have that tag syntax that can take multiple
tests per case. And so a lot of the use cases
for falling through are taking care of that.
However, if you do have a use case where you
need follow through, then it is available
to you. The next thing that I want to talk
about was switch statements are a special
use of a switch statement called a type switch.
So I'm going to drop in this example here.
And this should be pretty familiar except
for what we're switching on. So notice that
we are switching on a tag. But the tag variable
is typed to type interface, which can take
any type of data that we have in a go application.
So the interface type can be assigned to an
integer like we're seeing here, we can assign
it to a string to a Boolean, to a function
to a struct to a collection, anything we want
to assign to an interface is going to be permissible.
So then in go, we can use this syntax here.
So we can put in the dot operator. And after
that, put in params with the word type in
the middle. And what that's going to do is
tell go to pull the actual underlying type
of that interface and use that for whatever
we're doing next. Now, you don't just use
that for type switching. But this is a common
use case for it. So in this case, I'm going
to assign the variable i the value one, which
as we know is going to type I to be an integer.
And then I can actually use go types as the
cases, because this is going to return a type,
then I can use those type keywords here as
my cases. So if I run this, knowing that one
is an integer, I should not be surprised when
I see the first case passes, and the other
two are ignored. If I had a decimal point
zero here, then that's going to turn this
into a floating point 64. And we see that
go recognizes that. Similarly, if I put one
in a string here, then we're going to see
that go understand that. And I can even make,
for example, an array. And we don't need to
initialize any values here. But if we see
that, then go recognizes that as another type.
And if I want to have a case to catch that,
then I can actually have a case for a raise
of three integers. And then I can print that
out. Now if I run, we see that it recognize
that and this is different than two. So if
I use a two element array, please be aware
that those are different types. Arrays are
not equivalent to every other array, you have
to have the same data type and the same array
size in order for them to be evaluated as
the same type. Okay, the last thing that I
want to talk about I can illustrate with this
example here. Now in this example we're extending
on the previous one was type switches. And
notice that I've got these two print statements
here on line 11 and line 12. So if I run this,
I see that I is an integer and this will print
to it. In some situations, you might need
to leave a case early. So maybe inside of
the case, you're executing some kind of a
logical test, and you find out that there
is some logic in the case that you don't want
to execute in certain situations. Well, if
you want to do that, you can actually exit
out of the switch statement early by using
the break keyword. So if I add that and run,
then I have a way to break out of the switch
early. And I'm not going to execute any code
below that break statement. So you can wrap
this in a logical test to determine if you've
got a validation error. For example, on some
incoming data, you might not want to save
that data to the database. And then you can
use this break keyword in order to short circuit
that save operation. Okay, so that pretty
much wraps up what I have to talk about with
if and switch statements. Let's go into a
summary and review what we've talked about.
In this video, we started our discussion about
the different control flow tools that we have
available
to us in our NGO applications. And we started
out by talking about the very basic if statements
and how we can use a boolean variable to determine
if a block of statements will execute or not.
We then talked about the initializer syntax,
and how that allows us to execute a statement,
that's going to set up variables that we can
use to run our test against as well as use
within the statements of our if tests. We
then talked about the comparison operators,
and we talked about how there are six of them,
we've got less than, greater than, less than
or equal to and greater than or equal to,
to work with primarily the numeric types,
as well as the double equals operator and
the non equals operator that are available
to be used more generally, we talked about
the logical operators, the AND operator, the
OR operator and the non operator that allows
to chain together Boolean operations, as well
as reverse the result of a Boolean operation.
In the case of that knot operator, we talked
about short circuiting and how when you're
chaining together tests with an OR operation,
for example, if any one of those logical tests
evaluates to true, then the remaining tests
are not executed. So any side effects or any
functional operations that might occur with
those are not going to be executed. Similarly,
with an an test, the first part of an ad test
to return a false result is going to halt
the execution of that and test. So any side
effects you might be relying on afterward
are not going to occur. We then talked about
the two different variants of if tests, we
talked about the FL statement, and how we
can use that to execute one of two branches
of code. So if the if test succeeds, then
we're going to execute the first block of
statements. Otherwise, we're going to execute
the second block of statements. Related to
that is the if else if statement. And in this
case, instead of determining between one of
two paths, and forcing your code to execute
one of those, you can add additional logical
tests. So at most one block is going to execute.
But if all of your F tests fail, then you
might not get any blocks executing. And finally,
I took a minute to talk about equality operations,
especially when working with floating point
numbers. And how equality and floats don't
really get along that well. So if you do need
to do some kind of inequality operation with
floating point numbers, then you're going
to want to turn that into some kind of a comparison
operation against an error function. So for
example, we were checking to see if two floats
were equal, instead of checking to see if
they're actually equal, and we divided them
subtracted one from that result, and check
that against an error parameter. So we decided,
if they were within a 10th of a percent, they
were going to be considered the same, you
can use a similar type of error function with
your operations. But in general, you should
not test to see if two floating point numbers
are equivalent to one another. We then moved
on to talk about switch statements, and the
various ways that we can use those in our
applications. We started by talking about
how to switch on a tag or tag is just another
name for a variable. But that variable has
a special significance in a switch statement,
because all of your test cases are going to
be compared back to that tag. We talked about
how with go we can have multiple tests with
our case statements. And by doing that, we
can actually eliminate a lot of situations
in other languages where we need to fall through
and chain multiple cases together. Well in
go, we can just add those multiple tests in
the same case, and eliminate the need to do
that following through. We also do have initializers
available with switch statements. But instead
of the initializer, generally generating a
Boolean as we do with an if statement, the
initializer is going to generate the tag that's
going to be used for the comparisons. In our
cases, we talked about switches with no tags
and how it adds a lot of flexibility to the
switch statement. But it is a little bit more
verbose syntax. So instead of the cases being
compared for equivalency with the tag, we're
going to actually put in the comparison operation
ourselves. So we can use more than just equivalency
testing we can check less than or equal to,
or any other comparison function, including
chaining comparisons together by using logical
operators. We talked about how we have the
fall through keyword available in switches,
and how that replaces the break keyword in
many languages. So where many languages have
implicit fall through an explicit breaking
in go we flip it around so we have implicit
breaks. But if you do need one case to fall
through to the next Then you can use this
fall through keyword. Now one thing to keep
in mind when you're doing that is when you're
falling through, any additional case logic
is not executed, the fall through will override
any case logic that you have. And so the next
statement will execute regardless of if that
case would normally pass or not. We also talked
about type switches, and how we can use that
special syntax by adding a dot perenne type
perenne on an empty interface in order to
get the underlying type of that empty interface.
So for example, if we've got an empty interface
that's holding an integer, then we can use
that syntax in order to get that underlying
integer value. Then in our switches, we can
switch against those types. And then we can
make a decision based on the data that we
got in. And finally, we talked about breaking
out early, when we've passed into a case in
our switch statement. There are times when,
in the middle of the case, we need to exit
out early, because we've done some additional
analysis. And we've decided that we should
not proceed executing this case. So for example,
we've got a switch statement. And inside of
that case, we're doing some validation on
the data before we save it to the database,
we might decide that data is invalid, and
we should not proceed to save it to the database.
So in that case, you can use the break keyword
break out of the case and continue execution
after the switch statement, I want to continue
our discussion of the control flow structures
that we have available in the go language
by talking about looping. Now in the last
video, we talked about the two ways that we
have to introduce branching logic into our
application if statements and switch statements.
Well, when we talk about looping and go, things
are actually going to be a little bit simpler,
because we only have one type of statement
that we're going to have to learn. And that
statement is the for statement. Now we're
basically going to break this conversation
down into three different parts, we're going
to talk about simple loops, we're going to
talk about how we can exit a loop early. And
then we're going to talk about how we can
loop through collections. Okay, so let's go
ahead and get started by learning how to do
some simple loops in go.
So in order to start our discussion about
looping and go, I want to start with this
perhaps the most basic for loop that we can
create. So we're going to start with the for
keyword as you might expect. And then we're
going to follow the for keyword with three
statements, the first statement is going to
be an initializer. Now this is the same as
an initializer. And if statements and switch
statements. So we can add any kind of statement
that we want here. And normally, we're going
to use that in order to set up a counter,
when we're using a for loop like this, the
next statement that we have here is going
to be some kind of a statement that generates
a Boolean result. And that's going to be used
by the for loop to determine if it's done
looping or not. And then the last statement
is going to be the incrementer. And normally,
we're going to use that in a situation like
this to increment a counter variable. So if
we run this, we see that we get the numbers
zero through four printed out, we could also
increment i by two. And there, you see that
we only get three iterations of the loop,
because I has the value zero, then it has
the value two, and then it has the value four,
when it comes to the next time it has the
value of six, well, six is not less than five.
Therefore the comparison operation results
to false and we exit out of the loop. So this
is certainly possible to do and you will occasionally
see this. But the most standard way that you
see these loops created is like this using
an increment statement. Now if you're coming
from another language, you might be expecting
to be able to do something like this. So maybe
we want to variables, increment in our for
loop. And so we're going to initialize j there.
And then we're going to increment j with each
loop. So if we go ahead and try and run this,
we see that that's actually not allowed, because
we have no comma operator in the go language.
So you can't separate two statements like
this using the comma. So this is an error,
and this is an error. So if we want to do
that, though, we can use gos ability to initialize
multiple values at the same time by adding
a comma here getting rid of this part here,
adding the comma there. And then we can't
treat these as individual statements, because
you can only have one statement here. And
in go the increment operation is a statement,
it's not an expression. So we need to figure
out a way to do both of these at one time.
So we will simply come in and said I n j equal
to i plus one and j plus one. And go ahead
and run that. And now we have I printing out
if we have j here we see that j printout as
well, we can actually increment j by two here.
And we see that i and j are incrementing independently.
And we have no problems here. Now just to
come back and revisit that increment comment
that I made earlier, you might be tempted
to do something like this, if you just want
to increment them by one. If we run that,
we're actually going to get an error because
again, in go unlike a lot of languages, the
increment operation is not an expression.
So we can't use that as part of a statement.
It is a statement on its own. So when you're
just incrementing one variable, you can certainly
do this because i plus plus is a statement,
but we can't use that in combination with
anything else. We can't use it as an expression.
Something else that's interesting. Let me
go back to our initial example here. So we
can play around with this a little bit. So
at first blush, if you just come into programming,
this AI variable might seem like it's something
special because it's used up in the for loop.
And the fact is, it's a variable just like
anything else. So we can do whatever we want
with it. As a matter of fact, just to show
you that, let me drop in this cool little
bit of code. As you can see, what we're going
to do here is we're going to take the modulus
of i n two, and we're going to see if that
zero, so basically, we're checking to see
if it has an even number or an odd number.
If I is an odd number, then we're going to
divide it by two. If I is an even number,
then we're going to multiply it by two and
add one to it, it's just a couple things to
play around with the incrementer. So let's
run this and see if this actually goes to
completion. And in fact, it does. And you
see that the variables going all over the
place. So we start with zero zeros on so divide
that by two, which stays zero, the next iteration
is going to be one because we're incrementing
by one, so it's actually going to be multiplied
by two and one added to it. So we print the
one here. But then by the time we're done
here, two times one plus one is three, and
so is three, that gets incremented to four,
so we're printing for four out here, four
is even to divide that by two, two gets incremented
again, so we print out the value three, three
is odd. So three times two is six plus one
is seven, seven is greater than five. And
so we leave the comparison operation, so we
can do whatever we want with the counter.
Now, just because you can play with the counter
doesn't mean it's a good idea. As a matter
of fact, normally, it's very bad practice
to manipulate the counter within the for loop.
So maybe the best reason to show you that
you can do this is to make sure that you avoid
doing this because there can be times when
you're inadvertently changing the counter
variable within a loop. And your loops might
start to act really strange, like we're seeing
in this example here. Okay, so let's go ahead
and restore our original example, make sure
that that's running again, and it is we're
printing out the values zero through four
again. Now the next thing that I want to show
you is that we don't actually need all three
statements here. So one thing that we could
do, let's just say that I is initialized somewhere
else in our application, so we don't need
it to be set up here. And we can run with
this first statement being empty. Now you
can't leave this for a semi colon out, because
if you leave that out, then everything's in
the wrong place. And it thinks that this is
going to be the initializer. And this is going
to be the comparison operator. So if we try
and run this way, we're going to get an error.
But if we leave the semicolon in, then go
recognizes that we simply don't have an initializer
in this for loop. And it executes everything
the way that we expect it to. And of course
I've variable ri is taken in just like we
would expect. Now the difference between this
format and the previous one is in this i is
scoped to the main function. But when we have
this syntax here, I is scoped to the for loop.
So if I tried to print the value of i out
here, we're not going to get a valid value
because I is not defined. But in this other
form, when we're putting it out here, then
I is scoped to the main function. And we are
actually going to get the final value of I
printed out which is the value five, because
five is the first value that fails this test.
So this is actually coming from this statement
right here. Okay, the next thing that we can
do, let me go ahead and wipe this out, we
also don't need the incrementer value, so
we can eliminate that. Now if I run this right,
now, we're actually going to get an error,
because what this is going to do is it's going
to generate an infinite loop. And in the go
playground, they don't let us do infinite
loops. And so after it runs for a little bit
of time, it's going to shut the process down
on us. If we were actually running this in
a local environment, all you'd see is the
value zero printed out over and over and over
and over again, until eventually you got bored
and shut the application down. Now we can
of course, since I is a variable just like
any other, we can put the incrementer in here,
and everything works just fine. So once again,
we have to remember to put the semicolon here,
if we remove the semi colon, then go doesn't
know what the heck we're asking it to do,
because this is invalid syntax. So if you
have the first semicolon, you need the second
semi colon. Now this case does happen actually
quite a bit where we need a for loop and just
a comparison operation. And this is how go
does do while loops. So in a lot of languages,
you have two more keywords, you've got the
do keyword and the wild keyword. And normally
those work with simply a logical test. And
then you have some other increment operations.
So you either have an increment or inside
of the loop, or you're pulling the next value
off the stack. And comparing that on each
iteration, or something like that, we'll go
has the same problems to solve, but didn't
make sense for the designers of the language
to introduce a new keyword just for what is
basically a special case of a for loop. So
what they allow us to do is we of course can
use this double semi colon syntax here. But
you can also leave them both off. So if I
run this way, we see that this works. And
this is going to work exactly the same way
as if we have both of these semicolons here.
So this is a little bit of syntactic sugar.
It's exactly the same construct. It's just
you don't need to have the additional semi-colons
and it reads a little bit cleaner. So in this
case, our for loop is just doing a comparison
operation. Go is going to assume that we're
taking care of where those variables for the
comparison are coming from somewhere else.
Now the third form of a for loop that we have
available when we're working with counters
like this is the infinite for loop. Because
we also have a situation with do while loops
in other languages, where we need the application
to run through the loop and undetermined number
of times. And by undetermined means, we don't
actually know when to stop by an obvious logical
test, we need some complex logic within the
loop in order to determine when to leave.
So in go, the way that we do that is we simply
leave off the logical test, and we run like
this. So if I run this, again, as you might
expect, the playground is going to crash out
on us because there's no way for the program
to exit. And so it's just going to run forever.
So we need some way to tell our infinite loop
when it's done processing and when to leave.
And the way we're going to do that is using
the break keyword. And then Normally, the
way that you do this is you'll put some kind
of logical tests inside of the loop. So we
can say, if I equals five, then we're going
to use that break keyword. And we saw the
break keyword, the first time when we were
talking about switch statements, or the break
keyword is actually more commonly used inside
of for loops, especially this kind of infinite
for loop here. So what we're doing here is
if i is equal to five, so we're going to print
out the values, zero through four, then when
I was fine, we're gonna break out. So if we
go ahead and run this, we get exactly the
same values that we had before. Now when we
do this, we actually leave the entire for
loop. So execution of the loop stops, and
we're done processing. Now another thing that
we can do is use what's called a continue
statement. So let me drop in an example that
shows you that. So in this case, we're looping
from zero to nine, because we're going to
keep incrementing as long as i is less than
10. And then we're checking to see if the
value is even if it is even, then we're going
to use this continuous statement here. And
what this does is it basically says, exit
this iteration of the loop and start back
over. So what's going to happen when we have
00 modulates to is zero, so we're going to
continue, which means we're not going to hit
this print statement, when we have one, one
minus two is one, so we're not going to hit
this continue, and we're going to print out
one, and then two is going to hit the continue
and three is not. So what we should see is
we'll only print the odd numbers out. If we
run this, we see that that is in fact what
happens. So continuous statements aren't used
very often. But they can be very, very useful.
If you're looping through a large set of numbers,
and you need to determine within the loop
whether you want to process a record or not.
Now, to show you the next thing, I'm actually
going to do this, this is actually going to
print out a nested loop. So what we're doing
here is a pretty simple example, we're starting
with the variable, I initializing it to one,
and we're going to run as long as i is less
than or equal to three, and then we're doing
the same thing with J on the inside. So basically
is going to be one, then it's going to loop
through days from one to three, then is going
to be two, it's going to loop through j 4123.
Again, and then inside this inner loop, we're
just multiplying the two numbers together.
So if we run this, we see that we get all
of the permutations of i times j, where i
and j go from the values 123. So we get all
of these values printed out, and everything
works the way that we expect. Now what happens
if we want to leave the loop, as soon as we
get the first value that's greater than three.
So what we want to do is something like this,
so we're going to multiply it times j, we're
going to repeat our logic here. And we're
going to see if that's greater than or equal
to three, if it is, then we're going to break
out of the loop. Now if I run this, we don't
exactly get the expected result. And the reason
for that is as soon as i times j is greater
than three, it breaks out of the loop, but
the loop that is going to break out of is
the closest loop that it can find. So it's
actually breaking out of this loop here. And
this loop just restarts because there's nothing
to tell it to stop. So you might ask the question,
Well, how do we break out in the outer loop?
Do we have to have more logic here and check
to see if i times j is greater than three
again, and then break out? Well, the answer
is, of course, now, we do have a concept called
a label that we can add. So a label is put
together something like this, we're going
to start with a word and follow it with a
colon. And we're going to left justify that
in our code blocks. So once I have a label
defined, I can actually add the label after
the break keyword. And it basically describes
where we want to break out to. So since this
labels just before this for loop, we're going
to break out of the outer for loop. So if
I run now, I get to the value three, three
is greater than or equal to three. And so
I break out of both the inner and the outer
loop. The last thing that I want to talk about
in this video is how we can work with collections
with for loops. So we've seen this before
we have a slice of integers. In this case,
we're containing the values one, two, and
three. And we've seen how we can work with
this as a slice so we can print this out.
We run this we get no big surprise, we get
the slice printed out with the values 123.
But what happens if I wanted to work with
each individual value? Well, we've seen how
we can do this, we can pull out one value
from the slice, and we get the value two.
But how do we work with an arbitrarily sized
slice. So I don't know how big this slice
is going to be at runtime. I want to be able
to loop through all the items within the slice.
So the way that I'm going to loop through
a collection is using a special format The
for loop called a four range loop. So I'm
going to start that with the four keyword
as you might expect. And then what I'm going
to get is both the key and the value for the
current item in the collection. So I'm going
to have two variables that I can set there.
And then I'm going to set that equal to this
special range keyword and then provide the
collection that I'm going to range over. So
what this is going to do is it's going to
look at the collection here. And it's going
to take each value one at a time, give us
the key and the value, and then we're going
to be able to work with those values independently.
So inside of this, let's go ahead and just
print out the value of the key and the value
and run that. And you see that we get the
indexes for the items in the slice, and we
get their values. So the indexes are coming
first, those are the keys. And then the values
are the actual values in the slice. And this
is the only syntax, you have to remember when
using the range keyword, you're always going
to get this key comma value result coming
out. So this syntax is going to work for slices
and for arrays. So if we make this an array
by just adding a size, here, we see that we
get the exact same output, we can loop over
maps. So if I pull back the state populations
map that we use for a couple of videos now,
and loop over that, once again, pulling up
the key and the value and ranging over the
map this time, then if I print the key and
the value, I'm going to be able to split that
out and then get the state in their population
printed out separately. And I can even use
a string as a source for a four range loop.
Because what we're going to be able to do
here is pull each letter out of this string
as a character and look at that. And we see
that we do get each position. And now we get
this numeric value, which if you've been paying
attention over the last few videos, you're
going to remember that this is actually the
Unicode representation for that digit. So
we can cast it back to a string by just using
a simple conversion operation. And we see
that we get each letter printed back out as
we would expect. The other type of data that
we can arrange over in go is what's called
a channel. Now channels are used for concurrent
programming and go and that's a topic for
a future video. So I'm going to leave that
topic right now, I promise when we talk about
parallelism and concurrency and go, I'll revisit
the for loop and show you how you can use
for loops with channels, because there are
some special behaviors that you have to be
aware of when you're ranging over channels.
Now, if I come back to this example, and print
this out, you see that we have access to both
the key and the value every time. Now, this
is not always true, you don't always need
access to the value. And this can lead to
some problems. Because if I only want to print
the keys out and run this, this is actually
an error, because in go, you have to use every
variable that's declared. And so we got this
situation where we've got this variable v,
but we're not using it. And so that's going
to cause us a problem with our application.
Now and go what you can do, if you only want
to get the keys out, you can actually skipped
the comma value. And when you run that, it's
going to ignore the value. But what happens
if you get into a situation where you only
want to print the value out. So if I restore
this, and I want to want to print the value,
of course, I get the same error. But I can't
just say this, because go who's going to assign
the keys to that. So what do I do? Well, in
this situation, when you only want the values,
then you can use that underscore operator
that write only variable that we've seen a
couple of times. And basically, that's going
to give a hint to the compiler that we don't
actually care about the key. But we need this
in this first position in order to get the
value. So when we run this, we do see that
we get those populations printed out. Okay,
so that covers what I want to talk about with
four statements and go, let's go into summary
and review what we've talked about. In this
video, we talked about the second major control
flow construct that we have in the go language,
the looping construct, and we talked about
how we're going to use the for statement for
all of the loops that we need to do and go.
So we don't have to remember I do keyword
and while keyword and a for keyword, when
we use the for keyword that's going to allow
us to loop over every collection that we have.
We started by talking about simple loops and
how there are three basic forms for the simple
loop, we've got this first syntax, which is
the most basic, that's the initializer test
incrementer syntax, and we're going to use
that initializer
to set us up in our loop. Normally, by initializing
a counter variable, then we're going to follow
that with our test, our test is normally going
to look at the incrementer to see if it's
at a certain value that's out of range for
our for loop. And then we've got an incrementer
and that incrementer. His job is to move the
incrementer along at every iteration of the
loop in order to move to the next case that
we want to loop through. Now we also learned
in this first syntax, we actually can leave
the first and last statements on that out.
But if we're going to use any of this syntax,
we have to leave the semi colons in place.
So leaving a semi colon out confuses the compiler,
it starts to assign things to the wrong places.
And so you're going to get an error in your
application. So if you need an initializer
or an incrementer, then you're going to have
to use this full syntax. Now the second syntax
eliminates the need for the initializing the
incrementer. And it assumes that the test
conditions are being managed somewhere else.
So in this construct, you only have the for
test. And as soon as that test is false, you're
going to exit the loop. The last construct
that we have is the for loop on its own and
that will run indefinitely. Until somewhere
within your four loop, the break statement
is called. That leads us to how we can exit
early from a for loop. And we have three concepts
that we talked about with that, we've got
the break keyword that will break out of the
immediate loop that's executing and continue
the application execution after that loop.
The continue statement is similar to the break
statement, except for eight doesn't break
out of the loop, it just breaks out of the
current iteration goes back to the incrementer,
and continues execution of the for loop at
the next increment. Now we can also use labels
in our application and combine those with
break statements in order to break out of
an inner loop. And that's typically how they're
used in go. So for example, if you have a
nested loop where you're iterating over two
collections, and you need to break out of
the outer loop, then you need to set up a
label and then follow the break keyword with
the name of that label so that Google knows
where to break out to. And finally, we talked
about how to loop over collections, and how
the collections that we have available, there's
quite a few we've got arrays, slices, maps,
strings and panels that we can loop over.
But they all have this similar syntax, we're
going to use that for keyword, we're going
to get a key and a value. And then we're going
to set that equal to the range keyword followed
by the collection that we're looping over.
So the keys when working with arrays, slices
and strings are going to be the index within
that collection. So you're going to have that
zero based index. With maps, we're going to
get the key from that map. And the values
are what you expect them to be. They're the
value for that current index. Now when we're
talking about channels, it's going to follow
very similar syntax, but channels have a little
bit of a special interpretation for these.
And we'll talk about those in a future module,
I'd like to finish our discussion of control
flow constructs that we haven't go by talking
about defer panic and recovery. We'll start
that discussion by talking about deferred
functions, and how we can actually invoke
a function, but delay its execution to some
future point in time. Then we'll talk about
how an application can panic. So in this conversation,
we'll talk about how go application can enter
a state where it can no longer continue to
run and how the go runtime can trigger that
as well as how we can trigger that on our
own. And then related to panicking, we'll
talk about recovery. Now when your application
starts to panic, ideally, you'd have some
way to save the program so that it doesn't
bail out completely. So we'll talk about if
your application can be saved, how you can
use the recover function in order to signal
that to the rest of your application. Okay,
so let's go ahead and get started. In a normal
go, application control flows from the top
to the bottom of any function that we call.
Now, of course, we can alter that a little
bit by introducing branching logic so that
we can skip some statements. And we can use
looping that we talked about in the last video
to repeat certain blocks of statements multiple
times. But generally, a function is going
to start at the first line and execute through
until it gets to the last one. So if we run
this program right here, we see that it's
no big surprise that we print start, then
we print middle, and then we print end. And
what we can do if we want to defer the execution
one of these statements is proceeded with
the defer keyword. So if I put that in front
of this print line here, then run that, you
notice that middle is actually printed after
end. So the way the defer keyword works in
go, is that it actually executes any functions
that are passed into it after the function
finishes its final statement, but before it
actually returns. So the way this main function
is executing is its calling line eight and
it's printing out start, then it recognizes
that it has a deferred function to call and
then it prints out end. And then the main
function exits now when go recognizes that
that function exits, it looks to see if there
are any deferred functions to call. And since
we have one, and then goes ahead and calls
that, so deferring doesn't move it to the
end of the main function, and actually moves
it after the main function. But before the
main function returned. Now, if we put the
deferred keyword in front of all of these
statements, then we'll actually see an interesting
behavior. Because the deferred functions are
actually executed in what's called lifepo
order or last in first out. So the last function
that gets deferred is actually going to be
the first one that gets called. And this makes
sense, because often we're going to use the
deferred keyword to close out resources. And
it makes sense that we close resources out
in the opposite order that we open them, because
one resource might actually be dependent on
another one. So if we run this like this,
we actually see that we've reversed the order
of printing this. So we're now printing and
middle and start. And just to remind you,
these aren't executing in the context of the
main function they're executing after the
main function is done, but before it returns
any results to the calling function. Now,
these are good theoretical examples. But in
this situation, I felt it makes sense to get
a little bit more practical example for you
to look at. So for this, we're actually going
to need to go into Visual Studio code, because
we're going to need to run a program that's
going to make some resource requests through
the HTTP package. And you can't do that in
a playground. So if we look at this program,
here, we're importing a couple of packages.
Then we're using the get function from the
HTTP package in order to request the robots
dot txt file from google.com. Now this example
you can actually find in gos documentation.
I basically stole this as an example for how
you can use the deferred function. Now, as
you can see, with this request, we're going
to get a response and an optional error. And
we're going to check to see if that error
is nil. And if it's not, then we're going
to log that out and exit our application.
If it is not nailed, and we got a good response.
So then we're going to use the read all function
from the IO util package, what that'll do
is that'll take in a stream, and that'll parse
that out to a string of bytes for you to work
with. So if we look at the robots variable,
here, we see that that is a string of bytes.
And then we close the body of the response
to let the web request know that we're done
working with it, so it can free up those resources.
Of course, the read operation can fail, so
we're checking for that error. And then we're
finally going to print out the value of the
robots variable here. So if we run this application,
by invoking it with the go run command, we
see in fact that we do get the robots printed
out, and everything worked out just fine.
So we got this entire response printed out
to the console here. Now, one thing that we're
doing here, and that the defer keyword can
help with is handling this body close. Now,
in this application, we only have one statement
that's really being worked with between the
request being made, and the body being closed.
However, in many applications, you might have
quite a bit of logic that's involved, that
needs that body to be open and continue to
work with it, maybe you're reading this stream
one character at a time, and you're doing
some pattern matching or something like that.
So you can actually end up with quite a few
statements in here. So what can happen here
is that you might make this request and open
up this resource up here. And then it might
be dozens of lines later that you actually
get around to closing in. Well, that introduces
the possibility that you forget to close it.
Now, it's going to be hard to find that it's
going to be hard to remember to close the
resource. And so you're introducing the possibility
of bugs coming into your application. So what
we can do is add the defer keyword here. And
then we can go ahead and move this up a line.
So if we run this, then it looks like we're
closing the resource, and then we're trying
to read it. But if we run the application,
we see that it works just fine. Everything
comes out the same way it did before. Now
if we leave the defer keyword off,
then we do get an error because we closed
the response body before we were done reading
it. So what this allows you to do, and this
is the most common use case that I've seen
for using defer is it allows you to associate
the opening of a resource and the closing
of the resource right next to each other.
So you see this pattern a lot where we're
going to open resource, we're going to check
for an error. And then we're going to close
the resource. And you want to check for the
error first. Because if there's error generated
here, then you actually never got this resource.
And so trying to close, it will cause your
application to fail. But as long as you know
that you have the resource there, then it
makes sense to do a deferred call to close
it. Now, one thing I would warn you about
is this is a pretty common pattern. And you're
going to see this all the time. But if you're
making a lot of requests and opening a lot
of resources within a loop, then using the
defer keyword to close, it might not be your
best choice. Because remember, the deferred
statements don't execute until the function
itself executes. So if you've got a loop that's
going to loop over a million resources, you're
gonna have a million resources open before
all of those get closed at the same time when
the function finally executes. So if you're
working with resources in the loop, then you
might not actually want to use the defer keyword,
you might want to explicitly close those resources
when you're done with them. Or another option
would be to delegate the processing of those
resources out to another function and have
that function, close the resource. That way,
you're not keeping a bunch of resources open
at one time and wasting memory. Now the next
thing that I want to show you we can do back
in the playground. So I want to do that, because
I think that's the most accessible environment
that we have is this program here. So when
I run this program here, what do you think
is going to print out when I run this, now
there's two lines of thought that you might
have, the first line of thought is, well,
I'm defining a is the string start. And so
I'm going to print start out. But you might
also realize the defer statement is going
to cause this statement to print after the
main function is done. And before main is
done, we've already changed the value to end.
So you could make an argument that this is
going to bring start or end with the fact
is that we're going to get the values start
printed out. And the reason for that is when
you defer a function like this, it actually
takes the argument at the time, the defer
is called not at the time the called function
is executed. So even though the value of a
is changed, before we leave the main function,
we are going to actually eagerly evaluate
this variable. And so the value start is going
to be put in here, we're not going to pay
attention to this value as it changes. Now
the next thing that I want to talk to you
about in this video, is what's called panicking.
Now in go, we don't have exceptions, like
a lot of applications have, because a lot
of cases that are considered exceptional and
a lot of languages are considered normal in
a go application. For example, if you try
and open a file, and that file doesn't exist,
that's actually a pretty normal response.
It is reasonable to assume that you might
try and open a file that doesn't exist. And
so we return error values. We don't throw
exceptions because that's not considered exceptional
and go. However, there are some things that
get a go application into a situation where
it cannot continue and that is considered
exceptional. But instead of using the word
exception, which you has a lot of connotations
because of its use and other languages, we're
going to use another word and that word is
going to be panic. And that's because our
application can't continue to function. And
so it's really starting to panic because it
can't figure out what to do. So if we take
this example, here, I'm declaring two variables
a and b, and setting a equals one and B equal
to zero. Now, obviously, the answer of one
divided by zero is invalid, we can't do that
in a go application. So if I run this, we're
actually going to see that the runtime itself
will generate a panic for us. And the runtime
errors printed out integer divide by zero.
And then we get a stack trace letting us know
where that error occurred. Now, if you're
going along and writing your own program,
and you get to a situation where your program
cannot continue to execute, because of a certain
state that gets thrown, then it makes sense
for you to panic as well. So to do that, you're
going to use the built in panic function like
we see here. So we're printing out start,
then we're using the built in panic function
passing in a string, and then we're going
to print out. And what's going to happen when
we run this is very similar behavior to when
we had that divide by zero error a few seconds
ago, but the error message that's printed
out is actually going to be the string that
we passed into the panic function. And then
notice we get the same stack trace out, we
do get start printing out. But of course,
we don't get the string end printed out.
Now more practical example. Now this will
not run in the playground. But that's okay,
because it probably wouldn't fail on the playground
anyway, is this one here. So this is a very
simple web application where you're going
to use the handle function. So we're registering
a function listener, that's going to listen
on every URL in our application. And then
this is a callback that gets called every
time a URL comes in that matches this route.
And all this is going to do is print out the
string hello, go. As a matter of fact, why
don't I go ahead and do this over in Visual
Studio code, that way, you can see what this
program is going to do. So we'll go ahead
and save this and we'll get it up and running.
Now there's no errors and went ahead and started,
okay. So if I come in, and hit that URL, which
is localhost 8080, that you see that we get
the string hello, go printed out. There you
go an entire web development course in one
video. So we've got a very basic web handler
that's printing out the string, hello, go.
And that's coming from this line right here,
where we're writing to this response writer,
this response writer is basically giving us
access to the response to this web request.
And we're printing out the string hello, go.
Now, what's interesting here is this error
handler right here. So the listening serve
function returns an optional error object.
So when might that happen? Well, one situation
that can happen all the time, when you're
firing up a web server is the port can be
blocked. So if I open up another terminal
here, and go ahead and try and run this, again,
you see that we get our application panicking.
And the reason for that is we're trying to
access a TCP port that's already been blocked.
And it's been blocked by the fact that we're
running the application over here. So this
is a situation that happens all the time.
Now, the listening serve function doesn't
have an opinion on if that's a panicking situation
or not, because he just tried to execute something.
And it's going to return an error value saying,
Well, that didn't work, it's reasonable to
assume that listening serve can fail. And
so it's not going to panic is going to return
an error. Now, we're the ones writing the
web application. And we know that if that
doesn't work, the entire application gets
brought down, and nothing happens. So in that
situation, we decide that we're going to panic
passing out that error that comes from the
listening serve method, letting whoever's
trying to start this up, know that something
very bad just happen. And so this is a common
pattern that you're going to see and go go
is rarely going to set an opinion about whether
an error is something that should be panicked
over or not. all it's going to do is tell
you, hey, this didn't work the way that you
expected it to work. It's up to you, as a
developer to decide whether that's a problem
or not. So in this case, we say, yeah, that
is a problem, we fail to start our application.
And so we do want to generate a panic. So
what are we going to do in the situation that
our application is panicking. And we can get
ourselves to a situation where we can recover
the application. So panics don't have to be
fatal. They just are, if we panic all the
way up to the go runtime, and the go runtime
realizes wait doesn't know what to do with
a panicking application. And so it's going
to kill it. So we come back to this application
here, and run, we see that once again, we're
getting this panic. But something I want to
show you related to our deferred discussion
is this modification here. So I've added this
line, a deferred print statement that says
this was deferred. So if we run this application,
something interesting is going to happen.
We get stopped printed out. That's not a big
surprise. But then we get this was deferred
printing out and then the panic happens. And
this is really important, because panics happen
after deferred statements are executed. So
the order of execution is we're going to execute
our main function, then we're going to execute
any deferred statements, then we're going
to handle any panics that occur. And then
we're going to handle the return value. So
there's actually quite a bit that happens
in a function after it exits this closing
curly brace here. So why is this important?
Well, the first thing that's important is
that the first statements that are going to
close resources are going to succeed even
if the application panics. So if somewhere
up the call stack, you recover from the panic,
you don't have to worry about
resources being left out there and left open.
So any deferred calls to close resources are
still going to work even if a function panics.
But the other thing that's really important
is if I change my deferred function here to
something like this, now, this is a custom
function. And we're not going to talk about
this for a couple of videos yet. But this
is important in order to talk about this.
So I need to jump this ahead in the queue
a little bit.
So what we're creating here is what's called
an anonymous function. And an anonymous function
is simply a function that doesn't have a name.
So nothing else can call this, this is defined
at one point, and we can call it exactly one
time, these parenthesis here are making that
function execute. And this is an important
thing to know about the defer statement, the
first statement doesn't take a function itself,
it actually takes a function call. So you
want to invoke that function, otherwise, things
aren't going to work properly. Now, inside
of this custom function, notice that we're
using this recover function here. So what
the recover function is going to do is it
will return nil if the application isn't panicking.
But if it isn't nil, then it's going to return
the error that actually is causing the application
to panic. So in this logical test, we're checking
to see if it's not nil. So if it's not nil,
that means our application is panicking. and
in this situation, we're simply going to log
that error out. Now, what happens in this
situation is the execution still stops at
the panic. And let me import this log package
before we run this. And we see that the application
still execute. So we got the string start
printed out, then we printed out the error
using the long package. But we didn't get
this end function printed out. So it looks
like our application is still dead. But recovered
does have some important impacts if we have
a deeper call stack than what we're dealing
with right here. So let me drop in this example
in order to show you. So in this case, we've
got the main function, that's going to be
our application entry point, of course. And
then we've got this other function called
panikkar. And all this thing does is it's
going to print on the line that says it's
about the panic, and then it's going to panic.
And it's going to go ahead and recover from
that panic using that deferred function that
we saw just a moment ago, then we're gonna
have this line here, done panicking. And then
up in our main function, we're going to print
start, we're going to call the panacur. And
then we're going to print and so let's see
what happens when we run this. So as you see,
we get the start line printed out, like you
would expect, we see the about the panic string
print out, then we panic, something bad happened,
we go into our recover loop, because we're
not going to execute this because our application
panic. And so our panikkar function is going
to stop execution right there and execute
any deferred functions. And inside of that
deferred function, we call recover. So in
that recover, we're going to log out the fact
that we have that error, and we're going to
log that error message out that we see here.
But then in the main function execution continues.
So in the event that you're recovering from
a panic, the function that actually recovers,
still stops execution, because it's in a state
where it can no longer reliably continue to
function. And so it makes sense for it to
stop doing whatever it was trying to do. However,
functions higher up the call stack, those
functions that call the function that recovered
from the panic, they are still presumably
in a situation where they can continue, because
you recover function said that your application
is in a state working to continue to execute.
Now, this is a little bit limiting as well,
because in order to determine what that error
is, you actually have to call the recover
function, which basically means that you're
saying that you're going to deal with it.
So what happens if you get that error, and
you realize that this isn't something that
you can deal with? Well, in that case, what
you're going to do is repainting the application.
So all we need to do in order to do that is
just read through the error, or you can come
up with another error string, whatever makes
sense for you. But in this case, inside of
the handler, we're throwing a panic again,
then we actually see that we don't get that
end statement printed out our main function
panics because we read through that panic.
So we get the full stack trace of when the
panic actually happened. And we see that we're
inside a func one function, one is actually
this anonymous function right here. And we
see that we do get that stack trace printed
out and we don't get the string and printed
out. So if you're in a situation where you're
trying to recover from a panic, and you realize
you can't handle it, you can feel free to
re throw that panic, and the further management
of that panic, higher up the call stack. Okay,
so let's go into a summary and review what
we've talked about in this video. In this
video, we talked about the final two control
flow concepts that we have to be aware of
in go programming. Now, one could argue that
differs and panics aren't really control flow
constructs, because they're not the traditional
branching or looping logic that we consider.
But they definitely do alter the flow of execution
of our program. And so I'm going to lump them
together in this category. The first thing
that we talked about was the use of the defer
function in order to delay the execution of
a statement until the end of a function. Now,
these are useful to group open and close functions
together. So if your open function is going
to open up a resource, and you need to make
sure that you close that, then you can defer
the call to close that resource to make sure
that you're freeing up the memory and not
holding on to that resource any longer than
you need to. The one thing I would warn you
though, is be careful loops. If you're opening
and closing a bunch of resources inside of
a loop, then you probably want to explicitly
handle that close without the deferred keyword.
Because when you're using deferred keyword,
all of those resources are going to stay open
until the function finishes execution. And
that can cause you some memory issues, especially
if you're dealing with a very large number
of resources. If you've got multiple different
statements inside of a function, then they
run in life order or lastin. First out, so
the last deferred statement that you call
is going to be the first one that actually
executes. And again, this makes sense, because
if you're opening a bunch of resources, and
those resources are dependent upon one another,
then you're going to close them in the reverse
order that you open them, which is typically
the right way to go. arguments in a deferred
call are evaluated at the time the defer is
executed, not at the time the called function
is executed. And that's important to keep
in mind because you could pass in variables
into a deferred function call. And it can
be a little bit confusing if you change the
value of those variables further on. And those
aren't reflected in your deferred statement.
So just keep in mind, when you call defer,
the value of those variables are going to
be captured at the time that that defer is
executed, not at the time the function actually
executes. Now, something unplanned happens
in our application, then we've got two ways
that a go application can go it can return
an error value, which is the normal case,
or it can panic. Now, what you generally want
to do is you want to return an error value,
because in go programming, we typically don't
consider a lot of things that go wrong in
an application to be exceptional events, or
to be events that should cause the application
to shut down. For example, a classic example
of that is making an HTTP request, and you
make the request and you don't get a response
from that server. Well, that's something that
happens all the time, no response is a valid
response, it just happens to be an error,
because you're looking for that resource,
and you got a 404 return back. So in that
case, you're going to return an error value,
you're not going to panic, the application
panics are used when an application gets into
a state that it cannot recover from, for example,
you hand the runtime a divide by zero problem,
there's no way for you to figure out how to
divide a number by zero, and so has no way
to manage that. And that's a situation where
the application is going to panic. So just
to summarize, then, they occur when an application
can't continue at all, don't use them when
a file can't be opened. Unless it's a critical
file. For example, if you're opening a template
that's used in a web application to generate
your view layer, then that might be something
that's worth panicking over. But if you're
trying to open up a log file, and you can't
get there, well, there's no reason to panic
for that necessarily, you just need to return
an error value and then inform somebody that
the logs aren't available.
Now a situation where you might want to panic
is unrecoverable events. So if you're starting
up a web server, and it can't get ahold of
the TCP port that it's supposed to be listening
on, then that's probably a situation where
panic makes sense, the function will stop
executing immediately at the point of the
panic, but the third functions will still
fire. If nothing handles that panic, then
eventually the panic is going to go up the
call stack, it's going to hit the go runtime,
the go runtime has no built in handling for
panicking situations. And so the program will
then exit. If you do have a panicking situation
that you feel that you can recover from, then
you can recover using the built in recover
function. Now that function is used to recover
from panics, it's only useful inside of deferred
functions. And the reason for that is because
of the behavior of panic. Remember, when an
application starts to panic, it no longer
executes the rest of that function, but it
will execute deferred functions. So the proper
place to use the recover keyword is inside
of a deferred function, that's going to look
for a panicking situation. And if the application
is panicking, then it can go ahead and decide
what to do with it, the current function will
not attempt to continue. But if you do recover,
then higher functions in the call stack will
continue as if nothing went wrong. Now, if
that's not the behavior that you want, if
you call that recover function, you look at
the error that's returned from the recover
function and you can't handle it. Remember
that you can go ahead and rethrow that panic
by calling the panic function again. And then
the panic will continue to propagate up the
call stack, I want to talk about pointers
and how we can use them in the go language.
We'll start that discussion off by learning
how to create pointers. And then we'll talk
about something called dereferencing. a pointer,
which is basically using a pointer to get
at some underlying data. Then we'll talk about
the new function. And then we'll talk about
a special type in NGO called nil. And then
we'll wrap up our discussion by talking about
built in types and go that use internal pointers.
And so their behaviors a little bit different
than other types that you'll work with in
your applications. Okay, so let's dive right
in and learn how to create some pointers.
To start our discussion, I want to start as
simply as I can. So I'm going to use this
example here. As you can see him declaring
a variable a and assigning it the value 42.
And then I'm going to go ahead and print that
out. So it should be no big surprise that
when I run this, the value 42 gets printed
out. Now, if I extend this application a little
bit, and I create a variable b and assign
it to the value of a and print both of those
out, then again, it's no big surprise that
42 prints out two times. Now since a and b
are value types. When I put in this line here,
what go is going to do is it's actually going
to copy whatever data is stored in a and assign
it to be. So we're not actually pointing to
the same memory. And we can prove that by
changing the value of a to, for example, 27,
and then printing out everything again. And
if we run this, we see that the value of a
changes to 27, but the value of b stays at
42. Now we can change this behavior a little
bit by having B point to a using something
called a pointer. Now in order to demonstrate
that, I'm going to actually change our declaration
syntax a little bit and go to more of a long
form syntax. And the reason for that is to
make things a little bit more clear about
how the pointer notation works. So I hope
you'll agree with me that this line eight
is exactly the same as the previous one that
we had, it's just a little bit more verbose.
Now, if I want to change B into a pointer,
and use that same long form syntax, what I
can do is declare the variable b. And then
I'm going to declare it as a pointer to an
integer. And the way I declare it as a pointer
is by preceding the type that I'm pointing
to with this asterisk here. So then if I want
B to point to a, then I'm going to use a special
operator called the address of operator that
you see here. So at line nine is now saying
is that B is a pointer to an integer. And
I want to point it to a
now what is a pointer exactly? Well, let me
remove these lines here and run this and see
what we get as output. So as you see here,
a is still holding the value 42, like we expect,
but B is holding this strange data here. So
what is that? Well, this is actually the numerical
representation for the memory address that
is holding the location of a. So at this location
in memory, we actually have assigned the integer
42. So be isn't holding the value 42, it's
holding the memory location that's holding
his data. And we can prove that by using the
address of operator down here. And when we
run this, again, we should see, in fact, we
do see that the values are exactly the same.
So the address of A in memory is this value
here, and B is holding that exact value. And
as a matter of fact, we can even go the other
way. Because while the address of operator
is going to give us the address of a variable
in memory, we can use a different operator
in order to figure out what value is actually
being stored at a memory location. And that's
called the dereferencing operator. So if I
go ahead and remove this, and then I'm going
to put a dereferencing operator right here
in front of this pointer. Now you notice we're
using the same asterisk. But these have a
little bit different meaning here. So up here
on line nine, this asterisk before type is
declaring a pointer to data of that type.
So this is a pointer to an integer. Now when
I put the asterisk in front of a pointer,
then that's going to dereference, which basically
means it's going to ask the go runtime, to
drill through the pointer, find the memory
location that that pointer is pointing to,
and then pull the value back out. So if we
run this, we see that we get the value 42
printed out both times once again. Now what's
the point of all of this, what the point is,
since B is pointing at the same value of a,
Now both of these variables are actually tied
together. So if we change the value of a once
again, and then print out their data, now
we see that both A and dereferencing, b both
give the value of 27. Because they're both
actually pointing at the same underlying data.
As a matter of fact, we can even dereference
the pointer and use that to change the value.
So if I use the dereference, B, and assign
the value 42 to it, and then print it out
again, then we see that once again, both values
are changing a and the value that B is pointing
to our both teams, because it's in fact the
same data. Now, if you come from a background
in languages that allow you to work with pointers
as variables, then you might be expecting
to do something called pointer arithmetic.
So if I drop this example in here, we're going
to start to play around with something that's
going to lead us to see how go treats pointer
arithmetic. So I'm going to start with a variable
a, and that's going to hold an array of three
values, one, two, and three. And then I'm
declared B as a pointer to the first element
in the array to this value right here. And
then C is pointing to this second element
right here. Now if I use this print statement,
here, it's going to print the value of the
array and then this percent p syntax is actually
going to print the value of the pointer for
BNC. So if we run this, we see that we do
in fact, get the array and then we get these
two memory locations printed out that B and
C are holding. Now notice that C is holding
a value that's for higher than B. And the
reason for that is how go lays out arrays
in memory. Since this is an array of integers
and integers in this version of the runtime
are four bytes long each element of an array
are four bytes apart. So this memory address
ending with 124 is holding the first element
in the array, and then four bytes later, we're
going to hold the next element of the array
c you might be tempted to do something like
this if you come from another language, if
I take the address of C and subtract four,
then that actually should give me the address
of B and then I can dereference that and Both
of these should be pointing to the head of
the array. Well, if I run this, I in fact,
see that I get an error. And the reason for
that is go does not allow math like this to
be done on pointers. Now, once again, if you've
come from C or c++, you're probably aware
of the tremendous performance advantages that
you can get if you're allowed to do pointer
arithmetic, because you can jump around mapped
memory very, very quickly, and gain some pretty
substantial benefits in the performance of
certain applications. However, whenever you
get into pointer arithmetic, you're typically
getting into some fairly complicated code.
And since go has as one of its core design
concerns simplicity, the decision was made
to leave pointer arithmetic out of the go
language. Now, if you absolutely need to have
something like this in your application, then
what I would suggest is you can come into
the go packages and come down here to the
unsafe package. And this is going to give
you operations that the go runtime is not
going to check for you. So if you really need
to do pointer arithmetic and things like that,
then the unsafe package, which has a very
appropriate name is available for you for
those very advanced scenarios. Now, those
scenarios are advanced enough that what I'm
going to suggest is if you need to know it,
you're going to learn it. But generally, you're
not going to need to know how this stuff works.
Now the next thing that I want to show you
is how we can actually create pointer types.
So we've seen this address of operator and
that's allowing us to instantiate a pointer
to a certain variable. So if we look at the
type of B, it's actually a pointer to an integer
because we're pointing to one element in the
array. But so far, we've had to declare the
underlying type first. Well, that's actually
not necessary and go because often, you only
want to work with the pointers, and you don't
really care where the underlying data is stored,
you just need the ability to point to it wherever
it's at. So in this example, we see how we
can do that. Now we've seen almost exactly
the same syntax before, because when we were
talking about structs, we had an example that
looks something like this. So we were declaring
my struct object, we were instantiating it
using the object initialization syntax. And
when we print everything out, we print the
value 42 out. Now if I make this MSX variable,
a pointer to a my struct, and then use the
address of operator in this object initializer,
then I actually get almost the same behavior,
except for notice that when I print out the
value of MS, I end up with this ampersand
here, which is basically saying that ns is
holding the address of an object that has
a field with a value 42 in it. Now the advantage
of being able to do this, it's going to come
to light in a future video. But for now, just
be aware that you can do this. Now this isn't
the only way that we have available to us
to initialize a variable to a pointer to an
object, we can also use the built in new function.
Now unfortunately, with the new function,
we can't use the object initialization syntax,
we're just going to be able to initialize
an empty object. So if I go ahead and run
this, we see that we do get an initialized
object. But all of its fields are initialized
to their zero values, we can't initialize
them using the object initialization syntax.
Now, since I mentioned zero values, it's important
to understand the zero value for a pointer.
Because as we talked about, in a very early
video, every variable that you declare in
go has an initialization value. So right here
after line eight, ns is holding something.
So the question is, what is that thing? So
if I go ahead and copy this print statement
up here, we will be able to answer that question.
So let me format this and run it. And then
we see that we get the special value nil out.
So a pointer that you don't initialize is
actually going to be an initialized for you.
And it's going to hold this value nil. So
this is very important to check in your applications.
Because if you're accepting pointers as arguments,
it is best practice to see if that pointer
is a nil pointer. Because if it is, then you're
going to have to handle that in a different
way. So for example, if we try and drill through
and get to this foo field, but and this is
actually nil, then we're going to get a runtime
exception, and our program is going to crash
on us. Now that actually leads us to an interesting
point, how do we actually get at this underlying
field and work with it? Well, the obvious
way that we're going to need to do that is
we're going to have to dereference the ns
pointer in order to get it that struct, and
then we can get it that field. So we're going
to have to use something like this. Now, you
might be asking why the prints are there?
Well, it turns out that the dereferencing
operator actually has a lower precedence than
the dot operator. So we need to print in order
to make sure that we're dereferencing, the
MS variable instead of dereferencing, Ms dot
foo. So now we can go ahead and set this to
the value 42. Now in order to get at the value
of foo, to print it out, then we're going
to have to repeat the same exercise. So we're
going to add some brands here. I'm going to
wrap this ms variable, and then we'll print
out the value of foods. So if I go ahead and
run this, we in fact, do set and get the value
42, which is the value of that field. Now
I hope you'll agree with me at this point
that this syntax is really ugly, because we
use this syntax every time we dereference
a pointer, we're going to have to use match
that a params and have this dereference operator.
Well it turns out because of the limitations
that are put on point Here's the compiler
is actually able to help us out a little bit.
So in fact, we don't need this syntax at all.
If we go ahead and remove this and remove
this from the print statement as well, and
run this, we actually get exactly the same
behavior. Now again, if you're coming from
a language, which makes extensive use of pointers,
this is probably freaking you out. Because
the pointer and s
doesn't actually have a field foo on it. The
pointer MS is pointing to a structure that
has a field foo. So how is this working? Well,
again, this is just syntactic sugar. This
is just the compiler helping us out because
it understands or not actually trying to access
the Foo field on the pointer, we're implying
that we want the underlying object. And so
go is going to go ahead and interpret that
properly for us, and dereference, the pointer.
So the compiler really sees this statement
the same as this statement, they're exactly
the same to the compiler, it's just one reads
a little bit more cleanly. Now, the last thing
that I want to talk about today is how go
handles variables when they're assigned one
to another. So let me go ahead and paste this
example in here. As you can see, on line eight,
we're initializing an array. On line nine,
we're initializing another variable and pointing
it in the same array as a, then I'm going
to print out both A and B. And then I'm going
to change index one of the A array to 42,
and print them out again. Now, we've already
done this example in the past, and hopefully
you remember that a is going to change but
B is not because b is a copy of the array
that we stored in a and so they update independently
of each other. However, if I remove this index,
and turn this into a slice, the behavior changes
a little bit. If we run this, now we see that
both A and B are changed together. So what
happened there? Well, the slice is copied
just like the array, but the effect of the
copying is a little bit different. Because
in the version with an array, the values of
the array are actually considered intrinsic
to the variable. So A is holding the values
of the array, as well as the size of the array
and that size is held that way we can do bounds
checking. So for example, if we asked for
index three, which is beyond the bounds of
this array, and run, we can do bounds checking
in the go language. And that's a very good
thing. However, with slices, remember, a slice
is actually a projection of an underlying
array. And so the slice doesn't contain the
data itself, the slice contains a pointer
to the first element that the slice is pointing
to on the underlying array. So what that means
is that when we work with slices, the internal
representation of a slice actually has a pointer
to an array. So while line nine is still copying
the slice a into the slice B, part of the
data that gets copied is a pointer, not the
underlying data itself. What that basically
means is, when you're sharing slices in your
application, you're actually always going
to be pointing at that same underlying data.
Now, the other built in type that has this
behavior is a map. Because maps, once again,
have a pointer to the underlying data, they
don't actually contain the underlying data
in themselves. So if I take this example,
where I'm initializing a map of strings to
strings and assigning that to a, and then
B is assigned to a, then I print them both
out, then I change one of the values in a
and print them out again, if I run this, we
see that both maps start out the same. And
then when I change the key foo in the map,
a we actually change that in the map B as
well. So what does that mean? Well, what it
means is, when you're working with slices
and maps in a go application, you have to
be very, very careful to keep in mind at all
times who's got access to that underlying
data. Because passing slices and maps around
in your application can get you into situations
where data is changing in unexpected ways.
However, if you're working with the other
data types, specifically primitives, arrays,
or structs, then this generally isn't going
to happen to you because when you copy a struct,
it's actually going to copy the entire structure
unless you're using pointers. Okay, so that
wraps up what I have to talk about with pointers.
Let's head into a summary and review what
we've talked about in this video. In this
video, we talked about pointers and how to
use them in the go language. Now, we haven't
seen a lot of practical application for pointers
yet. But we need to understand what pointers
are. Before we get into that. So over the
next couple of videos, we'll get into why
you would want to use pointers and the benefits
of them. But for now, we're just trying to
introduce the basic subject. So we started
by learning how to create pointers. And we
learned that if we prefix a type with an asterisk,
that's actually going to declare that type
to be a pointer to that underlying data type.
So for example, we have this asterisk int,
which is going to be a pointer to an integer.
We also learned how we can create pointers
using the address of operator to get the address
of an existing variable in memory. Then we
learned about dereferencing pointers and how
we can use that asterisk operator again, but
this time in front of a pointer instead of
in front of a type and use that to drill through
the pointer to get at the value that the pointer
is pointing to. We also learned that when
you're working with complex types, such as
pointers to structs those pointers are automatically
going to be dereferenced for us. So our syntax
doesn't get cluttered up by a whole bunch
of dereference, operations and parenthesis,
then we moved on to learn how to create pointers
to objects. And we learned that there's a
couple of different ways. So the first thing
that we can do is use that address of operator
to get access to a pointer to an object that
we've already created. So in this example,
we've got an instance of a my struct object
called Ms. And then we can use that address
of operator to create a pointer p to that
struct. But we can also do that directly.
So if we proceed an object initializer, with
that address of operator, then we can actually
directly create a pointer. And we don't have
to have an intermediate variable that's holding
that value, we can also use the new keyword
to initialize an object, but we can't initialize
the fields at the same time. So the behavior
is a little bit different, because we're going
to have to use the new keyword that's going
to zero out all the fields in a struct, for
example. And then we're going to have to come
in later and initialize all the values. The
last thing that we talked about was types
with internal pointers. And we saw how while
they're treated exactly as any other variable
type, when we do an assignment, their behavior
is a little bit different. So all assignment
operations and go are copy operations. So
whenever you have a variable a and you create
a variable b and set it equal to a, all the
data in a is going to be copied in order to
create B. However, slices and maps contain
internal pointers. And so even though they're
copying, they're copying pointers, and so
they're pointing to the same underlying data,
we're going to take a deep dive into functions
and how you can use them in the go language.
Now, we've been talking about functions throughout
this entire video series. But we've never
really taken the time to focus on them, because
there's a lot of groundwork that we've had
to go through building up to the point where
we can understand what a function is, and
how we can use those in our applications.
So in today's video, like all of our videos
in this series, I'm going to break the discussion
down into multiple parts. We'll start by talking
about the basic syntax of a function. Then
we'll talk about the parameters that you can
pass into a function to influence how it works.
Then we'll talk about the return values that
you can get back out of the function. We'll
talk about something called an anonymous function.
We'll talk about how functions in the go language
are first class citizens and can be passed
around in your application like any other
variable, and then we'll wrap up our discussion
by talking about a special kind of function
called a method. Okay, so let's get started
by learning the basic syntax of a function.
To start our discussion of functions, we don't
have to go any farther than the basic application
that the NGO playground gives us. So as soon
as you come into the playground, you're presented
with this very simple application. And right
here, we have our first function. Now, the
way that a go application is structured, is
you always have to have an entry point in
the application. And the entry point of go
application is always in package main. And
within that main package, you have to have
a function called main that takes no parameters
and returns no values. So we can see that
right here. And so when we run the application,
the application actually starts right here.
And so we print out the string, hello playground.
And that's all that our application has to
do. So every NGO application starts this way.
And we see here the most basic function that
we can create in the go language. So there
are several major parts that we need to understand
about a function. First of all, they start
with the func keyword. So as you can see here,
we're not going to start with function or
anything else, we start with the func keyword,
and that's going to describe a function that
we're going to create. Then we have the name
of the function that we're going to create.
And this follows the same naming convention
as any other variable and go see you're going
to use Pascal case or camel case for the names
of your functions. And depending on if you
have an uppercase or lowercase determines
the visibility of that function. So just like
with variables, and uppercase first letter
is going to be published from the package,
so anything else can use it, and a lowercase
function name is going to be kept internal
to the package. Now after the name of the
function, we have these match params here
now we'll see as we get into parameters, what
these are for, but this is required syntax
after the main function. So even if you don't
take any parameters in your function, you
have to have these match params. And then
the actual body of the function is contained
within these curly braces here. Now there
are a lot of holy wars and a lot of languages
about where these curly braces should go.
So some languages put them here, some languages
put them down here, some languages like to
indent them, there's all sorts of different
conventions about where to put these curly
braces. Well, in the go language, there aren't
any arguments because this is the convention
that is enforced by the compiler itself. So
you have to put the opening curly brace on
the same line as the func keyword. And then
the closing curly brace generally has to be
on its own. Now there are a couple of situations
where you can have that closing curly brace
combined with a couple of other params. And
we'll talk about that a little bit later in
this video. But generally speaking, when you're
defining a function, the closing curly brace
has to be on its own line. Now, with functions
defined like this, the execution path is static,
we can't actually influence what our functions
doing from the outside, because we're not
passing any information into it. So if we
do want to pass information into it, then
we're going to provide what are called parameters
into the function. So let me just drop an
example that uses parameters. And you see
here a main function is now calling into another
function called say message. And that same
message function takes in this parameter MSG,
that's of type string. So when you're defining
a function that takes parameters, the parameters
go between these two parenthesis here. And
they're described like any other variable
declaration, except for you don't need the
var keyword. So you're going to have the name
of the parameter, and you're going to have
the type of the parameter. So then when we
want to call that function, we have to pass
in the value for that parameter. And that's
called an argument. So we're going to pass
in the argument Hello, go. And then inside
of our function, we're printing out the message
that gets passed in. And so when we run this,
we see that Hello go prints out as a result.
Now this MSG parameter isn't special in any
other way than the fact that it's passed into
the function, it's treated as a local variable,
just like any other local variable that we
might create. So if we created another variable
here, and we said, Hello, go, that's treated
exactly the same way as our mystery variable.
So the only difference between the two is
the MSG variable can be passed in from the
outside. And of course, that greeting variable
was created locally. Now, you aren't constrained
to just pass a single parameter in, you can
actually pass multiple parameters in. So if
I drop in this example, we can see that in
action. So here, I've extended the same message
function to take two parameters. So I've still
got the message parameter that's of type string.
And then I've put this comma here, and I've
added another parameter, and that's going
to be an index. And that's going to be of
type integer here. So as you can see, we can
pass as many parameters as we want, we're
just going to provide a comma delimited list
of those parameter names and their types.
So then when we call the function, we're going
to pass in one value for each one of those
parameters. And they have to be in the same
order that they're declared. So the first
argument that we're going to be passing is
the string hello, go, which is going to match
this MSG variable. And then we're going to
pass in the I that's going to be the loop
counter here. And that's going to be passed
into this ID x parameter. So then, in this
function, we're just going to print out the
value of the message and then we're going
to say what index we receive. So when we run
this, we see that the message prints out five
times. And we get the same message, but the
index variable changes because we're passing
in a different value every time we call the
function. Now, often, when you're defining
a function, you're going to pass in multiple
parameters of the same type. So you're going
to be tempted to have syntax like this. So
in this example, we've got a slightly different
function. So instead of a generic, say, Hello,
we're going to have a say greeting function.
And we're going to provide the greeting that
we're going to have and the name of whoever
it is we're going to greet. So in this case,
we're passing in the string hello, and the
string Stacy. So when we run this, we're gonna
say hello to Stacey. Now, since these types
are the same, the go compiler actually provides
us a little bit more syntactic sugar, because
this is a little bit more verbose than is
strictly necessary. So instead of specifying
the type every time, we can actually just
specify a comma delimited list of variables,
and then the type at the end. And what the
compiler is going to do is, it's going to
infer that every variable that's in that comma
delimited, list has the same type. So when
we run this, we actually get exactly the same
execution. But we just have a little bit more
terse syntax. Now, so far, we've been passing
parameters in as value types. If you remember
from our last discussion, we were talking
about pointers. And notice that I don't have
any pointers in our function signatures right
now. So let me drop in this example here.
And then we can start playing around with
the difference between passing in values and
passing in pointers. So when I have this example
here, and I run it, we get exactly the same
output that we had before. But I've got some
variables that I'm using to pass in as arguments
to this function. Now, what do you think is
going to happen if I change the value of one
of these variables inside the function, so
for example, if I change the name variable
to Ted, and let's go ahead and print that
out, just to verify that it printed. And then
what do you think is going to happen if I
print the same variable out, again, right
here. So I'm passing in the name variable
by value. So that means that the go runtime
is going to copy the data that's in this name
variable and provided to here. So what we
would expect is when we change the value of
the name variable right here, it should have
an effect. And we should print 10 out here.
But since this is a copy of the name variable,
we actually shouldn't have any effect out
here. So if we run this, we see that in fact,
that is true. So this is a safe way to pass
data into a function, you can be assured by
passing by value, that the data is not going
to be changed when you pass it in. Now, if
I change this to passing in pointers, by adding
a pointer here, and then passing in the address
of these variables right here, and then dereferencing,
the pointers right here, then let's see what's
going to happen. Actually, I need to add another
dereference right here. And now we're passing
pointers to our variables around in our application.
So now, instead of working with a copy of
the name variable, we're working with a pointer
to the name variable. And so when we run this,
we actually see looks like I missed a dereference
operation right here. And now we see that
we have in fact, change the variable not only
in the scope of the function, but in the calling
scope as well. So by passing in a pointer,
we have in fact manipulated that parameter
that we passed in. Now, why would you want
to do this? Well, there's a couple of reasons.
First of all, a lot of times our functions
do need to act on the parameters that are
passed into them. And so passing in pointers
is really the only way to do that. The other
reason is passing in a pointer is often much,
much more efficient than passing in a whole
value. Because right now we're passing in
simple strings, and strings aren't that large
and ghost, so passing in copies versus passing
in pointers is pretty much going to be the
same in terms of performance. However, if
you're passing in a large data structure,
then passing in the value of that data structure
is going to cause that entire data structure
to be copied every single time. So in that
case, you might decide to pass in a pointer
simply for a performance benefit. Now, you
do have to be a little careful when you're
passing in pointers, because of course, you
can inadvertently change that value. And so
you can cause some issues for yourself. Now,
just to remind you of something else that
we talked about in the pointer discussion,
if you're working with maps or slices, then
you don't really have this option, because
since those two types have internal pointers
to their underlying data, then they're always
going to act like you're passing pointers
in. So just be careful when you're using those
data structures. Because you can inadvertently
change the data in your calling function,
when you're manipulating them within the calling
function.
The last thing that I want to talk about when
we're working with parameters are what are
called variadic parameters. So if I drop in
this example, here, we can see an example
of a variadic parameter. So in this case,
I've got a generic some function that I'm
creating here, and I'm passing in the numbers
one through five. Now, I'm not receiving five
variables here, instead, I've got one variable
here, and I've preceded its type with these
three dots here. So what that's done is that's
told the go runtime to take in all of the
last arguments that are passed in, and wrap
them up into a slice that has the name of
the variable that we have here. So then inside
of the sum function, we're going to print
out what that values object is just so we
can see that and then we're going to go ahead
and add up all the values in there. So since
it's going to act like a slice, we can use
a for loop and range over those values. And
then we're going to print out the result of
that. So when we run this, we see that we
do in fact, have a slice is printed out, the
sum is 15. So we got that result printed out
properly. And there's no problem at all. Now,
when you're using a variadic parameter, you
can only have one and it has to be the last
one. So if I, for example, want to have a
custom message string, I can pass that in,
and then pass that in here and then replace
this. And this still works just fine. However,
I couldn't, for example, put the message parameter
as the last parameter, because the runtime
doesn't have the ability to understand where
the variadic parameters and and where additional
parameters would begin. So if you're using
variadic parameters, you can only have one
and a half to be at the end. Okay, now, it's
nice to be able to pass data into our function,
because now depending on the different data
that I pass in, I can change the behavior
of the function. But it's also very useful
to be able to use our functions to do some
work, and then return a result back to the
calling function. So in order to do that,
we're going to use what are called return
values. So if I dropped in this example, we
see it's basically the same as our last example.
But instead of printing the message in the
sum function, we're returning the result out.
And then the main function is actually working
with that. So there's a change we had to make
in our function signature. So right here after
the parameter list, and before the opening
curly brace, I've listed the return values
type. So in this case, I'm expecting to return
an integer. So I just put it right here, inside
of my function, I'm going to use the return
keyword. And then I'm going to return the
value of the variable that I've been building
up throughout the course of the function.
So in this case, I declare the result variable
here, I populated in this loop. And then I
return that result back now up here in the
main function, I can catch that return value
by declaring a variable and setting it equal
to the result of this function. So S is actually
going to be an integer type, because that's
what was returned out of this function. And
then I can work with that integer. So if I
run this, I get exactly the same behavior
that I had before. But now the sum function
is more of a pure function, it doesn't care
what I do with that result, it's just going
to generate the result and return it back
to the caller. Now another feature that go
has that's actually pretty rare in a lot of
languages, is the ability to return a local
variable as a pointer. So in our previous
example, when we return that result, go actually
copied that result to another variable, and
that's what got assigned. But we can also
do this. So if you look here, I'm returning
a pointer to an integer now. And instead of
returning the result, I'm returning the address
of the result. And so S is now a pointer.
So I change to a dereference operation. So
if I run this, it works exactly the same way.
Now again, if you're coming from another language
that uses pointers a lot and doesn't abstract
away the differences between working on the
stack and working on the heap, then this might
freak you out a little bit, because when we
declare the result variable, it's actually
declared on the execution stack of this function,
which is just a special section of memory
that's set aside for all of the operations
that this function is going to be working
with. So in this funk Exit, then execution
stack is destroyed, that memory is freed up.
And so in a lot of languages, this is not
a safe operation, because now you're returning
a pointer to a location in memory that just
got freed. And so you've got no idea what
value is going to be there.
Well, in the go language, when it recognizes
that you're returning a value that's generated
on the local stack, it's automatically going
to promote this variable for you to be on
the shared memory in the computer, what's
also called the heap memory. So you don't
have to worry about this value being cleared,
the runtime is going to recognize that you're
returning a pointer from the local stack,
and everything is going to work for you just
fine. And that makes a lot of things more
convenient. Because within the function, we
can work with this as a true value. So we
don't have to worry about dereferencing pointers,
and then just right at the end, we can return
the address of the result. And the runtime
makes it all work for us. Another thing that
we can do in the go language, and this isn't
done very often, but there are cases where
it is valuable is using named return values.
So if I drop in this example here, notice
that I've changed my return value. Now I've
got a set of parenthesis here. And then I've
got a name for the return value and a type
for it. So when you do this, this is basically
syntactic sugar for declaring a result variable.
So this variable is going to be available
in the scope of our sum function. And then
that value is going to be implicitly returned.
So we can work with that result variable right
here within our function. And then we don't
have to specify the name of the return variable
down here in line 17, we just have to tell
it to return. So when we run this, we see
that once again, we get exactly the same behavior.
But the body of our sum function is actually
quite a bit cleaner, because we don't have
to do the maintenance of instantiating, this
result variable. Now, this is actually not
done very often in the go language. And my
suspicion is because it can be a little bit
confusing to read, because your return variables
are declared way up here at the top of the
function, and your actual return is down here
at the bottom. So if you're reading this code,
and you're trying to figure out what this
function is actually going to return, you
have to come all the way back up to the function
signature. So this can be a very valuable
technique to use. But I would be very careful
with it. Because if you've got long functions,
the named result parameters can actually be
more confusing instead of less confusing.
So you have the option there, pick whichever
one makes the most sense for your application.
The last thing that I want to talk about with
return values is the fact that we can do multiple
return values from a function. So in order
to show you why this is valuable, let's take
this example here. So I've created a simple
divide function that takes in two parameters
A and B, that are float 64, it's going to
divide them and it's going to return that
result back. So if I run this, I get 1.6 666.
Like you might expect, and everything's fine.
But what happens if I pass in a zero here.
Now when I run this, I get an unknown result,
I get a positive infinity result. And I can't
work with that in my application. So I'm going
to probably cause some sort of a failure down
the line. So in a lot of languages, the only
thing we could do is throw an exception or
panic the application and go when we detect
that there's this invalid value for the parameter
B. So I guess we could do that we could add
some kind of logic here. If b equals equals
0.0, then we're going to panic and we're going
to say, cannot provide zero as second value.
And that would work. But keep in mind when
we talk about control flow and go, we don't
want to panic our application as a general
course of action, because panicking means
the application cannot continue. Now, in fact,
this application cannot continue if somebody
provides the value of beat. But it's reasonable
to assume that we might pass zero in for this
be parameter occasionally. So instead of doing
this, what we actually want to do is return
an error back letting the calling function
know something that they asked it to do wasn't
able to be done properly. So instead of doing
this, we're actually going to add a second
return variable. So to do that, we're going
to add a print here. And we're going to return
an object of type error, and then close that
parenthesis off. So we can return as many
values as we want from a function. But this
is a very idiomatic way of using the go language.
So we're going to return the intention of
the function as the first return value. And
then we're going to return an error object
in case something went wrong. So in that case,
what we're going to do is, we're going to
remove this panic, because we really don't
want to be doing that. And we're going to
return the first value, we're just going to
zero it out, because we can't do this operation,
so we can't return anything meaningful. And
then we're going to return an error object.
Now you can generate one of those by using
the air f function. And we can say cannot
divide by zero. So we're going to provide
a value for that error. And then that's all
we need to do here. So since we've returned
to this function in the error case, then if
we get past it, we can continue as if our
parameters are okay. And so in that case,
we can actually do our operation. And then
for the error value, we're going to pass nil
because no error was present. And again, this
is very idiomatic go, we're going to return
an error value if something went wrong, and
then we're going to explicitly return nil
if nothing went wrong. And then if you've
read any amount of go code, you've seen this
quite a few times. We're going to check to
see if that error also Got our standard if
error is not equal to nil, and then we're
going to put our error handling logic in here.
So in this case, all we're going to do is
print out the error and return from our main
function. So we're going to exit our application.
If we don't have that, then we're going to
just print out the result of our calculation.
So again, this is a very common pattern and
go inside of your functions that can generate
errors, you're going to return the expected
value and then an error as the second parameter,
then you're going to have a guard that's going
to check for those error conditions, you're
going to return as soon as possible from your
function with the error value if an error
is present. And the reason for that is we're
going to try and left justify our code as
much as possible. So we don't end up with
these pyramids of doom, where we're going
to have else checks. And we do all of our
error checking at the bottom, we're going
to do our error checking at the beginning
and then return out as soon as possible. So
if we do get past that, then we're going to
be on our happy path. And we're going to return
out the result of a calculation and then a
nil error up in the calling function, we're
going to have the standard test to see if
error is not equal to nil. If it isn't equal
to nil, then we're going to process that error,
because now we've got something we're going
to have to deal with. And then again, we don't
have an else block here, we just continue
moving on, we're going to make sure our error
handling logic either recovers from the error
or exits onto the function. And that way,
we can keep our main thread of execution left
justified. So our main thread of execution
here is we're going to call this divide function,
and then we're going to print out the result.
So any error handling should not force the
main line of execution to be indented. So
now if we run this, we see that I forgot to
initialize my error parameter. So let's go
ahead and add that. And this is something
else I should talk about. When we're receiving
multiple values out of a function call, we
actually have a common delimited list of those
return values. So this D parameter is going
to match up to this float 64. And this eerr
parameter is going to match up to this error
parameter here. So now if I run, everything
should work. And we see that we now get an
error cannot divide by zero. So our main function
doesn't explode on us, we actually have something
that we can work with. But if we put in a
valid value, then we're on that other path
of execution, and we get the return value
back out. Now, so far, we've been treating
functions as this special thing, because we're
always using this func keyword, we're declaring
these at the top level of our application,
we're working with them. But functions and
go are actually more powerful than that. Because
functions themselves can be treated as types,
they can be passed around as variables, they
can be passed as arguments into functions,
you can get them as return values, pretty
much anything you can do with any other type
you can do with functions. So let's take a
look at that a little bit. So in this example,
I'm actually declaring a function on the fly.
And this is called an anonymous function.
Now we're going to continue to explore this
over the next couple of minutes. But this
is the simplest example I can come up with.
So notice that I'm starting with the func
keyword, I've got the params. For the parameters,
I've got the opening and closing curly brace,
but I don't have the function name here. So
when you're doing this, this is what's called
an anonymous function. And this is the basic
structure of a function when you're not working
with functions in this traditional scope.
But instead you're working with functions
as types. So inside of my function body, I'm
printing out the message Hello, go. And then
I've got accompanying my closing curly brace,
these params here. Now these params here are
basically going to invoke this function. So
this is an immediately invoked function, I'm
defining it and executing it at exactly the
same time. So when I run this, and actually
does execute that function, and we get the
value Hello, go printed out. If I don't have
these friends, then the compiler is a little
confused. It doesn't know what to do with
this function. It's just defined, but it's
never used anywhere. So fails a compilation
check. But if I do invoke that function immediately,
then I get this behavior here. Now why would
you use an anonymous function like this, I
actually have no idea why you would use an
anonymous function like this. I mean, there
can be situations where you can declare variables
inside of here. So if I declare a message
variable here, and I set that equal to this
string, and then print that out, that can
be valuable because you're actually generating
an isolated scope. So this message variable
is not going to be available in the main function
is only going to be inside of this anonymous
function here. Now another place that you
might use this is if we've got a for loop.
So if I start up a simple for loop, and I'll
just count up to five, and increment by one,
let's see if I can do this on the fly here.
And then I come in here and I actually print
the value of i out, I'll get rid of this message
here and I'll print out I, you're going to
get a little bit of strange behavior. If I
run this, this works, okay. But as we start
getting into asynchronous code, things are
going to start behaving a little bit oddly.
So we do have access to this AI variable,
because we're in the scope and the main function.
And so inner functions can actually take advantage
of variables that are in the outer scope.
But the problem is, if this function is actually
executing asynchronously, then this counter
variable is going to keep going. And we may
actually have odd behavior here. So the best
practice is actually to provide a variable
inside of here and actually pass that AI variable.
And what that's going to do is we're not going
to be reading from the outer scope anymore.
We're going to be passing that into the function
execute And that way, even if this is running
asynchronously, we're going to print out the
value correctly. Now, this works correctly
in the playground, the way that we have this
right now, because we actually aren't doing
anything asynchronously. This is all synchronous
execution. And so we are safe to use this
outer counter. But it's not good practice
to do that. Instead, it is best practice to
pass in that kind of variable. If you need
that in your inner function. That way, changes
in the outer scope aren't reflected on the
inner scope. Now taking this a little bit
farther, we can work with functions as variables,
like I said before, so in this case, I've
declared an anonymous function, and I've assigned
it to this variable F. And then I can execute
f by just invoking it like any other function.
So if I call that, we see that we do print
hello, go out. So now that I've got this function
defined as a variable, it's free to pass around
my application. Now, you might ask yourself,
what is the signature for this function. So
let's go ahead and go through that. So if
I get rid of the short syntax and extend this
out a little bit, then I'm going to start
with the var keyword. And since this is a
very simple function, the type is just like
this, we have the func keyword, and then an
open and close parenthesis. So the parameter
is normally going here, I don't have any parameters
here, I don't have any return types. So the
type signature for this variable is simply
func with two params. There. So if I run this,
that works just fine. Now we can go a little
bit more complicated. And I'll drop an example
of that in just to show you how that's going
to look. So in this case, I'm declaring a
function signature for a divide function,
that's going to take in two floats, and it's
going to return a float and an error. And
you see, this is the syntax for that. So we
pass our parameter types in here. And then
we have the return types in params. As well,
if you have just a single return type, then
you don't need these params, we could just
put the type there like that. But we do have
that error type this coming back. So we do
need to include that. And then when I initialize
that variable, I'm going to set it equal to
an anonymous function that takes a and d.
And this is exactly the same divide function
that we had before. And I can call that exactly
like we had before. So when I run this, it
has exactly the same behavior as the last
example we did with the divide function. But
now we have the divide function declared as
a variable. And we're working with it exactly
the same way as when we declared it as a function.
Now, the difference between this and when
we had the divide function declared globally,
is if I try and call it up here and run the
application, notice that I get an error because
in this case, the function divide hasn't been
declared yet, because it's declared as a variable.
And so I can't work with it yet. So that's
just something to be aware of. If you're going
to be working with functions as variables
like this, make sure that they're defined
before you actually try and execute them.
Okay, the last thing that I want to talk about
with functions today is working with what
are called methods. And there's a couple of
things to talk about with those. So let me
just drop in an example that shows that. And
we can walk through this and then see what
it's going to do. So in this example, I've
got a struct called greeter that greeter struct
has two fields greeting and name. And then
I've got this method on it. And we'll come
back to this in a second. So in my main function,
I'm declaring a greeter struct, and then I'm
calling this function preceding it with the
struct that I have here. And this is how we're
going to do method invocation. So we call
the method just like we were accessing a field,
except for we have the params here where we
can pass some arguments in. Now my method
declaration down here looks a lot like a function
except for it's got this odd bit right here.
And this is what makes this function into
a method. So a method is basically just a
function that's executing in unknown context,
and unknown context. And go is any type. Now
it's very common that we can use structs.
But you can use any type. So we can make a
type for an integer. So maybe we have a type
for an integer called counter. And then we
can add methods on to that counter type, and
work with those. So when we declare that method,
we're actually going to get access to that
type right here in this part. So what's going
to happen when we call the greet method is
the greet method is going to get a copy of
the greeter object. And that's going to be
given the name g in the context of this method.
So then when we print out, we can access the
fields on that greeter object. So we can print
out the greeting and the name. So when we
go ahead and run this, we see that we get
Hello go printed out. And that's the basics
of a method. So methods are basically the
same as functions, they just have this little
bit of syntactic sugar, that's providing a
context that that function is executing in.
And when we do that, we call that a method.
Now when we use this syntax right here, notice
that we're specifying greeter as a value type,
we don't have a pointer here. So this is what's
called a value receiver. The received object
in this greet method is the value greeter.
So what that means is just like any other
time that we're working with values, we are
getting a copy of the struct, we're not actually
going to get the struct itself. So if I change
the value of the Name field here, and then
I print the Name field out of here, so I say
the new name is and then I print the Name
field out, then it's no big surprise that
even though I assigned an empty string to
the Name field here, up here in the main function,
it didn't have any effect. Because down here
in this method, we're operating on a copy
of the greeter object. We're not operating
on the greeter object itself. So again, that's
very valuable if you want your methods to
be able to access the data of their parent
type without being able to manipulate Just
keep in mind there is a cost with that. So
if there's greeter object was a very large
struck, then we would be creating a copy of
that struct every time we invoke this method.
Now, as you might expect, there's another
option that we have here. And that is to pass
in what's called a pointer receiver. So if
we make this a pointer, and run the application,
again, now we're actually able to manipulate
that underlying data. So we're going to print
out Hello ghosts. So the method operates in
exactly the same way. And we don't have to
change the format here, because we do have
that implicit dereferencing of pointers that's
working for us. But now when I change the
value of the Name field, and print the Name
field out up here, we do in fact, see that
we've been able to reassign the value of that
field. Okay, so that covers working with functions
in the go language. Let's go into a summary
and review what we've talked about. In this
video, we talked about functions and how to
use them in the go language. And we started
out by talking about the basic syntax of a
function, and we saw that this is about as
simple of a function as we can get. So we
start with the func keyword, we have a name
for that function. And again, if that first
letter is uppercase, then that function is
going to be published and allowed to be executed
from outside of the package. But with a lowercase
first letter, it's going to be kept internal
to the package, then we follow with a match
set of parenthesis, and then we have an open
and closed curly brace. Now the open curly
brace has to be on the same line as the func
keyword. And the closed curly brace has to
be on its own line after the final statement
of the function, then we moved on to talk
about parameters and parameters allow us to
pass data into the function to influence how
that function executes, basically providing
some variables for the function that are passed
in from the outside. So we talked about how
parameters are passed in as a common delimited
list of the name of the parameter and the
type of the parameter. So we see here we're
passing into the Foo function, two parameters,
the bar parameter that says type string, and
the bass parameter that's of type integer
parameters of the same type can be comma delimited.
And the type can be listed at the end there.
So in this case, we're passing in bar and
Babs as parameters. And both of those are
going to be of type integer.
When pointers are passed in the function contains
the value in the caller. So by default, we're
going to be passing in the values themselves.
And so the go runtime is going to be copying
that data and passing it into the function.
So any changes that are made inside of the
function aren't going to be reflected in the
color scope. However, if you pass in a pointer,
then you are going to be able to manipulate
the value inside of your function. And that
will have an effect in the calling scope.
So the only exception to this rule is when
you're working with slices and maps, since
they work with internal pointers, any changes
inside of the function to the underlying data
is always going to be reflected inside of
the calling scope. We also talked about how
you can use variadic parameters to send a
list of the same types in, so it must be the
last parameter in the parameter list. It's
received inside of the function as a slice.
And you see an example of the syntax right
here. So we've got the function foo. It has
one parameter bar that's of type string, and
then a parameter Baz, that's a very attic
parameter of integers. So inside of this food
function, we're going to have a slice called
Baz. And that's going to contain all of the
integers that have been passed in. Once your
function finishes doing its work, a lot of
times we want it to return a value back out.
And in order to get that information back
out, we're going to use return values. So
if you have a single return value, all you
need to do is list the type. So in this case,
our foo function needs to return an integer,
we can also specify multiple return values.
So if we're going to do that, we need to put
parentheses around the types that we're going
to be returning. So in this example, we're
going to be returning an integer and an error.
And this is a very common pattern that you're
going to see in NGO applications where we're
going to have our functions return the intended
value, and then an error value that's going
to let the caller know if anything went wrong.
That way, the function itself doesn't have
to determine whether the application needs
to panic, or execution can't continue. It
just knows it wasn't able to do what it was
asked to do. And then it can delegate what
that error means to the application to the
calling function, you can also use named return
values. So when you do that, instead of just
providing the types in the return last, you're
going to provide the name of that return value.
So when you do that, the runtime is going
to initialize that value for you to the zero
value for that variable. And when you use
the return keyword, all you need to do is
enter return on its own go is going to find
the current value of those returned variables.
And that's what's going to be returned out
of your function. Another special behavior
of go is you can actually return the addresses
and local variables as return values, and
those are going to be treated properly. So
when you do that those variables are automatically
promoted from local memory or stack memory
up into shared memory or heap memory. So you
don't have to worry about those values being
cleared out as the function stack memory is
reclaimed. We then started talking about anonymous
functions. And we talked about a couple of
different uses for those. So we have this
immediately invoked function, which really
isn't used too often in the go language, but
it's as simple of an anonymous function as
I could get. The only potential advantage
that you have here is you can create an inner
scope. So local variables that are created
inside of this anonymous function aren't going
to be available outside, but I haven't seen
that very often. It's not going to be very
often that you're going need to use this kind
of a function, then we also talked about how
we can take that anonymous function and actually
assign that to a variable. So in this example,
we've got the variable a assigned to the value
of that function. And then we can invoke the
a function just like any other function. The
only difference between this and the normal
declaration of a function is that the a function
can only be invoked after it's been declared.
So when you declare a function using the traditional
syntax, it's actually declared at the time
that the package is initialized. And so it's
always available to you. When you're using
this syntax, you have to make sure that a
is initialized before you can call it extending
on that discussion about the ability to assign
functions to variables, functions, or types,
just like any other type in go language, anytime
you can use a primitive or a slice or an array
or a map, you can use a function. So you can
assign them to variables, you can use them
as arguments, they can even be returned values
from functions, then we also talked about
how since a function is a type, we have to
have the ability to create a type signature.
So if you're declaring anonymous functions,
it's often most convenient just to use that
colon equals syntax and declare your anonymous
function and the type is going to be inferred.
However, if you're using a function as a parameter
to another function, or the return value from
a function, then you're going to need to specify
that type signature. So we see an example
here. In this case, we've got the definition
of a function f. And that function is going
to take three parameters, two strings, and
an integer. And then it's going to return
an integer and an error type. So it's basically
the same as when you're declaring a function
normally, the only difference is we don't
have the names for those variables. Because
those names will be provided when we actually
implement the function, we just need to know
the types that are coming in, and the types
that are coming out at this point. The last
thing we talked about were methods, and how
method is a special type of function that
executes in the context of a type. Now a type
doesn't have to be a struct. Although that
definitely is a very common use case for methods,
you can actually attach a method to any custom
type. So you can create a type of an integer,
and then you can add methods on to that integer.
When we create a method, we're going to use
a modified version of the basic function syntax.
So before the name of the function, and after
the func keyword, we're going to provide another
set of parentheses, we're going to provide
a local name for the type that's going to
receive that method. And then we're going
to follow that with that method type. Now,
that variable is what's called the receiver
for the method. So in this case, our G variable
is what's called a value receiver, which means
we're going to get a copy of that greeter
object. And that's going to be passed into
the greet method. However, we can also use
what are called pointer receivers. So by adding
an asterisk in front of that greeter type,
the method is going to change. So instead
of passing a copy of the greeter, we're going
to get a pointer to the greeter object in
there. And then any manipulations we make
to the greeter object in the greet method
are going to be reflected throughout your
application. Now, that's very powerful if
you need the method to be able to manipulate
the state of the object. It's also much more
efficient if you're dealing with large structures,
because instead of copying the entire structure,
it only has to copy a pointer. And that's
normally a much more efficient operation,
I want to talk about one of the coolest features
of the go language. And that is interfaces.
Now I know that interfaces are normally considered
pretty humble features, and they sit in the
background. It's much more fun to talk about
go routines and channels, especially when
you're learning to go language. But I would
argue that the way interfaces are implemented
in the go language are potentially one of
the reasons why go applications tend to be
as maintainable and scalable as they have
proven to be. So we're going to start this
conversation like we start every conversation
by introducing the basics. So we'll learn
what an interface is and how to use them in
the language itself. Then we'll move on to
discuss how to compose interfaces together.
Now, just like in other high level languages,
such as Java, or C sharp, we can actually
make interfaces of interfaces. And we'll talk
about how to do that, and why that's a very
good thing to do when you're writing your
applications. Then we'll talk about type conversion.
Now, we've touched on this a little bit before
in a previous video. But when we talk about
interfaces, things changed a little bit, and
it's worth revisiting the topic. Along the
way, we're going to talk about the empty interface,
which is a very useful general construct that
we're going to deal with in our programming.
We'll also revisit type switches, which we've
talked about before, and we'll revisit them
in the context of our interface discussion.
Then we'll talk about how to implement interfaces.
And there's actually two different ways that
you can do that. One is by implementing with
value type, and one is by implementing with
a pointer. And we'll talk about some of the
subtle differences that you're going to run
into as you implement interfaces with these
two different types. And then finally, we're
going to talk about some best practices that
have been discovered over the last few years
of working with the go language about how
to use interfaces in your actual production
applications. Okay, so let's get started by
learning the basics of using interfaces in
go. So to start our discussion about interfaces,
I'm going to actually build our first application
up a piece at a time now often I just drop
in code and talk about it. But I want to take
this one step at a time so that we're working
together and understanding what's going on.
So the first thing that we're going to do
is we're going to introduce our first interface.
So interfaces are a type, just like structs
or type aliases. So we're going to start with
the type keyword, then we're going to enter
the name of our interface. And then the type
that we're creating is a type interface. And
then we're going to surround the definition
of this interface with curly braces, just
like we do when we're defining a struct. Now
with a struct, we would add in here, the data
that we want that struct to hold on to because
structs are ultimately data containers. And
so that's how we work with them. interfaces
don't describe data, interfaces describe behaviors.
So instead of entering a bunch of data types
that we're going to be storing inside of a
writer interface here, we're actually going
to be storing method definitions. So I want
to create a write method here. And this is
actually an interface from the IO package,
we're just going to be working with it here
as if we created it. But this is exactly the
same interface that you would find in the
IO package under the writer interface. So
this method is going to accept a slice of
bytes. And then it's going to return an integer
and an error. Now on the writer interface,
the way this works is anything that implements
this interface is going to take in that slice
of bytes, write it to something that something
might be the console, it might be a TCP connection,
it might be the file system, we don't know,
we just know that we're writing a slice of
bytes to something. And then the integer and
error that get returned, of course, the error
is there in case something goes wrong with
the write operation. And the integer is normally
the number of bytes written. So now that we
have the interface defined, let's go ahead
and implement it. So we're going to implement
this with a console writer implementation,
and that'll be a struct. And that's all we
need to do with the struct definition. Now,
if you come from another language, you might
be looking for an implements keyword or something
like that. Well, in go, we don't actually
explicitly implement interfaces, we're going
to implicitly implement the interface. And
we're going to do that by actually creating
a method on our console writer that has the
signature of a writer interface. So let me
just drop that in. Because if I try and type
all this out, I will screw it up, and then
I'll have bugs that I have to go through.
So it's much easier just to drop it in. But
notice what I've done here, I've got a method
on my console writer called write. So it's
got the same name as my writer interface,
it's accepting a slice of bytes, and it's
returning an integer and an error. Now the
implementation is whatever I want it to be.
Now, in this case, all I'm going to do is
convert that byte slice into a string and
printed onto the console to keep things easy
in the playground. But I can have my writer
do whatever I want.
So what's the value of doing this? Well, the
value of doing this is up in my main method,
I can actually create a variable that's of
type writer. And let me just drop that code
in and format it and set that equal to a console
writer instance. So the W variable here is
holding a writer, which is something that
implements the writer interface. I don't actually
know the concrete type, though. So when I
call the write method down here on line nine,
I know how to call that because that's defined
by the interface. But I don't actually know
in my main function, what's being written
to, that's the responsibility of the actual
implementation. So I could replace this with
a TCP writer, I could replace it with a file
writer, I could replace it with any other
kind of writer. And so I get what's called
a polymorphic behavior. Why nine doesn't care
what it's writing to, I specify that behavior
before that. But then anything that's going
to use this w object just knows that it can
write to it. And so it can take advantage
of that behavior. So if I go ahead and run
this application, you see that I do get a
logo printed out to the console, just like
I would expect. So the key takeaway here as
we're learning the basics of interfaces, is
this concept of implicit implementation. And
so what that means, for example, is if you
need to wrap a concrete type, and somebody
hasn't published an interface, you can actually
create an interface that their type implements.
So we did it the other way, we created an
interface, and then we created a concrete
type that implemented it. But there's nothing
to say we can't go the other way around. We
could, for example, go to if I travel to go
lang.org, and go into packages, this is actually
something that I just ran into, in order to
test SQL database connections. So if I come
down to the database package, and go into
the SQL package, if we look at this, notice
that the DB type is a struct. So we don't
have an interface here. So if our go application
is talking to a SQL database, we've got concrete
types all over the place. So for our transactions,
we're interacting with this DB object. everything
that we're doing sending SQL statements making
queries are all through this concrete DB object.
So how do I test that without a database?
Well, the way that you test that without a
database is you actually create an interface
that replicates this method signature, and
the DB object from the SQL package will automatically
implement it, so I don't have to worry about
creating inner phases at design time if I
don't need them myself, because consumers
of my library or whatever I'm creating can
always create interfaces later. And their
interfaces can be shaped to exactly what they
need for their application. Now another thing
that I want to talk about before I move on
here is a naming convention. Now obviously,
the name of the interface should represent
what that interface is going to be doing for
you. And there is one special case, if you've
got single method interfaces, which are very
common in the go language, then the convention
is to name the interface with the method name
plus er. So if we're defining an interface,
like we have here with the right method, then
the interface name should be writer, if we're
going to create an interface with a read method
on it, then the interface name should be a
reader. Now if you got more than one method
in the interface, things can get a little
bit more challenging. But at the end of the
day, you should name your interface by what
it does. And in the case of a single method
interface, just add er onto the end of the
method name. Okay, now, in this example, we
use the struct, which is probably one of the
most common ways to implement interfaces,
but you don't need to any type that can have
a method associated with it can implement
an interface. And as we've talked about before,
any type can have methods associated with
it. So in order to demonstrate that, let me
just drop in this example here. Now in line
16, through 18, I've defined a new interface
called incrementer. And that increment is
going to be a method that only returns an
integer, so it's going to increment something.
So whatever we're going to implement this
thing with, is going to increment values.
So down here on line 20, I defined the type
alias for an integer called an int counter.
And then I added a method to that custom type
on lines 22 through 25. And that's going to
be my implementation for the incrementer interface.
So the method name is called increment, and
it's going to return an integer. Now, in this
case, look at what I'm doing, I'm actually
incrementing. The type itself, since I've
got a type alias for an integer, it's a number,
so I can go ahead and increment that. And
then I'm going to return it as the result
of this method call.
So I've actually got a type defined on an
integer, and the integer itself is storing
the data that the method is using. So up here
in my main function, I'm going to go ahead
and create that integer counter. And I have
to cast an integer to an encounter. In order
to do that. That's what I'm doing here on
line eight. And then I create my incrementer
and assign that to a pointer of the my ns
object. And we'll talk about why that has
to be a pointer toward the end of this video.
And then I'm just going to loop from zero
to nine. And I'm going to print out the value
of the increment method every time I call
it. So if I go ahead and run this, I see no
big surprise, I get the values one through
10 printed out. So what's the takeaway here?
Well, you don't have to use structs. To implement
interfaces, you can use any kind of custom
type. Now I couldn't add a method directly
to the entity type. Because the event type
isn't under my control that's defined in another
package. It's a matter of fact, that's a primitive
type, and you can't modify it. But any type
that I do have control over that I can create,
I can add methods to it. And if I can add
methods to it, I can implement interfaces
with it. Now the next thing that I want to
talk about is how to compose interfaces together.
Because this is another very powerful concept
in the go language, and is one of the keys
to scalability, because if you remember I
mentioned a little while ago, single method
interfaces are very common and very powerful
in the language, because they define a very
specific behavior. But by having a single
method, they don't have a lot of opinions.
And so they can be implemented in a lot of
ways. So for example, the IO dot writer interface
is one of the most common interfaces in the
entire go language, because all it does is
talk about how to write two things. And we
write two things all the time. So by taking
as little opinion as possible, we actually
make the interface very, very powerful and
very, very useful. So let me go ahead and
paste this example here. Because what happens
if we need more than one method, but we can
decompose the interfaces down. So in this
case, I've created an interface that's composed
of other interfaces. So I've got my writer
interface that we started the video with.
And then I've added this closer interface
that just has
a closed method on it, and returns an error
just in case something happened when we tried
to call this method. Now the writer closer
interface is actually composed of the writer
interface and the closer interface. And this
is done exactly the same way that you do embedding
with structs. We're just embedding interfaces
within other interfaces. So the writer closer
is going to be implemented. If an object has
this method on it, and this method on it,
then we can treat that as a writer closer.
So as an example, I've created this struct
here, a buffered writer closer. Now, I'm not
saying that this is an efficient way of doing
things. This is just an example of how you
might use this writer closer interface in
a way that runs in the playground easily.
So in this case, I've got my write method
that I'm going to be implementing. And what
I decided to do is I'm going to write out
whatever gets sent into the buffered writer
closer. I'm going to print that out to the
console in eight increments. So that's what
all this code is doing, when you pass data
into the write method, it's going to store
that in this internal buffer that the structure
defines. And then as long as the buffer has
more than eight characters, it's going to
go ahead and write that out. But it won't
write anything out if it's got less than eight
characters. So we're basically buffering the
data that we're sending in. And then down
here in the close method, I've got to implement
that too. And so what we're gonna do there
is we're going to flush the rest of the buffer.
So I'm pulling the next eight characters out.
And I'm going to write that out to the console.
And keep doing that until the buffer is empty.
Okay, up here in the main method, I simply
create a writer closer variable, and define
that using the new buffered writer closer
function. And just to show you that I didn't
talk about it, that's down here at the bottom,
that's just a constructor function that's
returning a pointer to a buffered writer closer.
And I need to do that because I need to initialize
this internal buffer to a new buffer. So I
have a constructor method there just to make
sure that everything has been initialized
properly. So if I come back up to the main
function, and look at that, then I'm going
to call the right method. And I'm converting
the string hello youtube listeners, this is
a test over to a byte slice, because that's
what the right method expects. And then I'm
going to call the close method. So if I go
ahead and run this, you see that I get the
message printed out to the console in eight
character chunks. And eventually I get all
this printed out. But if I comment out this
last method, call here, you see that I don't
get the a test part of the string, because
that's actually a partial. And so we didn't
get that full eight characters that's required
for the right method to print it out. And
so I didn't actually flush the buffer. Okay.
So I know that maybe a little bit of a complicated
example, to show a fairly simple thing. But
I just wanted to show you this is how you
can compose interfaces together. And as long
as you implement all of the methods on the
embedded interfaces, then you actually implement
the composed interface as well. The next example
that I want to talk about is how we can do
type conversion. So I'm going to go ahead
and replace my main function here with this
code here, get rid of the extra curly brace,
actually, I'm going to get rid of this too,
I guess I pulled in the whole function signature.
And then I made a little bit of a change down
here in line 13. So lines nine through 11
are our original implementation, where we're
creating the new buffered writer closer or
writing a string out, and then we're calling
the close method on it. But on line 13, I'm
actually doing a type conversion. So using
this syntax here, where I've got an object,
dot, and then in parentheses, I've got a type
that I'm going to try and convert this variable
to. And then I can assign that to a variable
such as this PwC variable right here. Now,
if that succeeds, then everything's fine.
And I can go ahead and work with it. Now,
there's nothing useful I can do with this.
But I'm just printing out the variable, because
I have to use the variables and go. So I'm
just going to go ahead and print that out.
So if I run this, I see I get exactly the
same output I had before. But now I get the
memory address of this buffered writer closer,
so that tape conversion succeeded. And therefore
I can work with this no longer as a writer
closer, but as a buffered writer closer. So
for example, if I needed to access the buffer
directly, then I would be able to do that
now. Whereas with the writer closer, it's
not aware of the internal fields of a specific
implementation. And so I wouldn't have access
to that data. Now there is a problem. However,
if I import the IO package, and try and convert
this to a type that it doesn't implement.
So for example, if I try and convert this
over to an IO reader, which is another interface,
and that IO reader interface requires a read
method on it. So if I try that now, let's
go ahead and run that. And we see here we
put the application into a state that it can't
manage. And so what it does is whatever good
go program does, when it can't figure out
what to do it panics. And the panic messages
interface conversion, it can't figure out
how to cast a buffered writer closer into
an IO reader. And so it's going to fail on
us. Now, it does give us some useful information
about why it couldn't do that. It says it's
missing a method read. And then it's gonna
give us a stack trace letting us know where
that error occurred. Now, this isn't really
great, because sometimes we need to try and
convert an interface into something else.
And we're not sure if it's going to work or
not. So it's not going to be good for our
application to be panicking all the time,
because then we're going to have recovers
and we're going to be using that as a primary
control flow concept. And we want to avoid
that in the go language, because panicking
is pretty expensive. So we need another way
around it. Well, we just so happen have another
way around it. And so I'm going to show you
that. All we need to do let me rename this
variable, because PwC doesn't make sense for
a reader anymore. I'm going to paste this
code in. So I'm going to now try and cast
it to a variable called R. I'm going to do
the same type conversion, but now I'm using
this comma, okay, syntax. So we've seen this
before, when we were trying to pull a value
out of a map and we weren't sure if it was
there or not. Well, we have the same ability
with type conversion. If we add a comma, okay,
this is going to be a Boolean result. And
then we can test against that to see if we
can work with it. So if the conversion succeeds,
then we're going to get an okay value back
out. If the conversion fails, then we're Going
to get the zero value of whatever type we
were trying to convert to. So an IO reader
is an interface. And so it's zero value is
going to be nil. So if we go ahead and run
this now, we see that our conversion failed,
but our application didn't crash. If we switch
this back to a pointer to a buffered writer
closer, let me go ahead and drop that in.
And we run that we got to drop out our package
here that we're no longer using. And then
we see that we're back to having things successfully
converted. And we could work with that however
we needed to. So this is really important
to be aware of, especially if you're not sure
if you're going to get a pointer or a value
type. So for example, it would be really easy
to write this and have a problem because we
implemented the interface with a pointer,
not with the value itself. And so we can't
actually do the conversion to the underlying
value type. So let's go ahead and run this
again, we see that that all works. And one
more thing I want to show you let me just
pull this error back up again, you'll notice
that the reason this type assertion failed
is because buffered writer closer does not
implement writer closer now that might seem
a little strange to you, because our buffered
writer closer has a write method, and it has
a closed method, and they have the right signature.
So for some reason this works when I asked
it to convert it to a pointer, but it doesn't
work when I asked it to convert it to the
underlying value. Now we'll come back in just
a second and talk about why that happens.
But I want to finish our discussion of type
conversions first. So stay tuned, and we'll
talk about why that works the way it does.
So the next thing that I want to talk about
is something called the empty interface. Now
the empty interface is exactly that. It's
an interface that has no methods on it. And
we describe that using this syntax here. Now,
this isn't a special symbol, this is just
an interface that we're defining on the fly,
and we don't have any methods on it. So it's
called the empty interface. But there's nothing
special about it, we could create this as
the empty interface exactly the same way by
just deleting the method out. And that's an
empty interface now, so you see it like this
all the time. Just be aware, there's nothing
special about this, it's just an interface
to find on the fly that has no methods on
it. Now the nice thing about the empty interface
is everything can be cast into an object that
has no methods on it even primitives because,
well, an integer has no methods. And so it
can be cast to the empty interface. And so
this can be very useful in situations where
you've got multiple things that you need to
be working with. But they aren't tight compatible
with one another. And you need to apply some
logic later to figure out exactly what you
received. But we do have a problem with the
empty interface. Because we now have this
my object variable that's defined as an empty
interface, we can't actually do anything with
it, because my object has no methods that
it exposes because it's an empty interface.
So in order to do anything useful with a variable
that has the type of an empty interface, you're
going to need to do either type conversion,
or you're going to need to start using the
reflect package in order to figure out what
kind of an object you're dealing with. So
in this case, on line 10, I'm actually trying
to type cast into a writer closer, and I'm
using the comma okay syntax to see if that
worked. If it does, then go ahead and call
the write and close methods like I saw before.
And then I've got this other type conversion
that I've done that before just to keep things
consistent. So if I run this, we see that
I forgot to re import the IO package, let
me go ahead and pull that back in.
And we see that everything works as normal.
So the empty interface is very common. But
just keep in mind, it's almost always going
to be an intermediate step. And you're going
to define a variable of the type empty interface.
And then you're gonna have to figure out exactly
what you receive before you can do anything
useful with it. The last thing that I want
to talk about in the context of type conversions
are type switches. So I want to revisit that
conversation from a few videos ago. And just
to show you, we can do something like this.
So in line eight, I've got a variable i that's
defined as the empty interface, and I'm setting
it equal to the integer zero. And then I'm
going to use this switch block here, and I'm
going to use this syntax. So I've got my variable
name I, and then I'm going to use this dot
and inside of prims, I'm going to put type.
And so what this is called is this is called
a type switch. So each of the cases in this
type of switch are actually going to be a
data type. So in this case, I'm looking to
see if I've got an integer or a string, or
I've got a default case, which is going to
be handled by our application, just saying
it doesn't know what AI is. So let's go ahead
and run this, I properly identify as an integer.
So we execute this case here. If I put params
around this, then of course, I is now going
to contain a string. And so if I run that,
again, it identifies it as a string. And if
I change this, once again, maybe we can make
this a Boolean, gotta spell true correctly,
and run that then it has no idea what it is.
So this is commonly paired with the empty
interface in order to list out the types that
you're expecting to receive. And then you
would add in the logic of how to process those
different types. Now, I promised you that
we would come back and talk about that weird
type conversion behavior, where we could convert
our writer closer into a pointer to a buffered
writer closer but Couldn't convert it into
the value itself. So now I want to go through
and have that conversation about why that
happened. So let me just drop this code in.
This is a much simpler implementation than
what we had before. I've actually not really
implemented these methods anymore, in order
to keep things as clean as possible for you
to see. So all I'm doing is I'm going to create
a my writer closer, and that's down here as
my writer closer struct with nil implementations
for the methods. But I do have the methods
implemented. So I can create this object as
a writer closer, and then I'm just printing
out the value of the variable just so we have
some use for that variable. So the go runtime
will actually compile and run this, and the
interface for the writer closers to find exactly
the way we had before. So if I run this, everything
works out just fine. However, what happens
if I change the receiver of one of these methods
to a pointer? Well, if I run this, now, I
get an error. And the reason that I get that
error is it can no longer convert my writer
closer into a writer closer interface. And
it gives us an interesting message here, it
says my writer closer does not implement writer
closer, the right method has a pointer receiver.
And this is the key to understand what happened
with this. So when we define types, and we
assign methods to them, each one of those
types has what's called a method set. Now
when you're working with the types directly,
the method set is all of the methods regardless
of the receiver types associated with that
type. With interfaces, however, things change
a little bit when I implement an interface
with the concrete value. So notice here I'm
creating my writer closer, I'm not taking
the address of my writer closer, I'm using
my writer closer directly. So WC is defined
as holding the value my writer closer. So
the method set for a value when we're talking
in the context of an interface is any method
that has a value as the receiver. So the reason
we're not implementing writer closer is because
a write method no longer has a value receiver,
it's going to point a receiver. And so its
method set is incomplete. And now we can fix
this by using the address of operator and
running again. And notice now everything works.
And the reason for that is the method set
for a pointer is the sum of all of the value
receiver methods, and all of the pointer receiver
methods. So let's go through that. Again,
when I'm implementing an interface, if I use
a value type, the methods that implement the
interface have to all have value receivers.
If I'm implementing the interface with a pointer,
then I just have to have the methods there,
regardless of the receiver type. So the method
set for a value type is the set of all methods
that have value receivers. But the method
set for a pointer type is all of the methods
with value receivers, as well as all of the
methods with pointer receivers. So there's
a couple of ways that we could fix this. Now
in this case, we don't need access to the
underlying data. So we could just go back
to a value receiver. And then this is going
to work just fine. This is actually the initial
example we had. If we have one method that's
going to appoint a receiver, however, we're
going to need to switch that over to a pointer
type. And notice I can actually remove this.
And it continues to work. Or I can make both
of these pointer receivers. And this continues
to work as well. So this is an important concept
when you're implementing your own interfaces.
If any of the methods require a pointer receiver,
you're going to have to implement that interface
with a pointer. If not, though, if all of
the methods except value types, then you can
go ahead and use a value type if that's what
you want. But you could also use a pointer.
Okay, the last thing that I want to talk about
are some best practices when using interfaces
in your own go applications. So let's take
a look at those. Okay, when we're working
with interfaces, there's a couple of rules
and guidelines that I'd like you to keep in
mind. And these have been developed over the
last few years by the NGO community, and are
generally accepted as some of the best ways
to use interfaces, if it's practical in your
applications. The first is prefer many small
interfaces versus large monolithic ones. Now,
if you need large, monolithic ones, that's
fine, go ahead and compose smaller interfaces
together to make those but the smaller you
can make your interfaces, the more useful
and powerful they're going to be. And that's
not actually unique to go. No matter what
language you're working in interfaces there.
They're generally having many smaller interfaces
is preferable in the long run to having a
few monolithic ones. Now, some examples that
are in the go standard library are the IO
dot writer interface, the IO dot reader interface
in the empty interface. Now these are arguably
three of the most powerful interfaces in the
entire language. And if you think about it,
writer has one method reader has one method
and the empty interface has zero methods.
So it's interesting support to the argument
that smaller interfaces are better that some
of the most powerful interfaces in the language
contain one or zero methods on them. Now when
you're working with interfaces, if you're
coming from a language that has explicitly
implemented interfaces, You're going to be
very tempted to create interfaces and export
those. So here's the guidance for that if
you don't need to export the interface yourself,
so if you don't have any particular reason
to do it, go ahead and don't. So there are
some good examples of why you would want to
do that. But often, it's perfectly acceptable
to export the concrete type.
I'll take as an example, the database slash
SQL package that we looked at earlier in the
video, where we saw that the DB object was
exported as a concrete struct. And it had
all sorts of methods that pointed to other
concrete structs. So you can't directly mock
that out for testing right out of the box.
However, by not exporting an interface, it
allows you as the consumer of that struct
to define your own interface that you can
use for testing. And the beauty of that is,
if you don't use every method on the DB object,
your interface doesn't have to have every
method on it, you can just expose the methods
that you need, however, do export interfaces
for types that you will be using. So if you're
going to pull a value in, go ahead and accept
an interface instead of a concrete type, if
at all possible. So this is going to be almost
exactly backwards from how other languages
consider interfaces. And the reason is that
whole idea about implicitly implementing interfaces
instead of explicitly doing it. So if you
were working in Java or C sharp, you could
not do this, because you have to define the
interface before you implement the interface,
because they're explicitly implemented. But
since go has implicit implementation, you
can go ahead and defer the creation of the
interfaces until exactly when you need them.
So if you're creating a library that other
people are going to consume, you can define
the interfaces that you accept. And then they
can provide whatever implementations that
they want. Now, if your library has reasonable
defaults, then you could export those concrete
types as well. But make sure that you're accepting
interfaces whenever possible. And that's what
this third point is talking about. design
your functions and methods to receive interfaces
whenever possible. Now, that's not always
possible. If you need access to the underlying
data fields, then certainly taking the concrete
types. But if you're accepting behavior providers,
then go ahead and try and accept those as
interface types instead of the concrete types.
Okay, so that covers what I want to talk about
with interfaces. today. Let's go into a summary
and review what we've talked about. In this
video, we've talked about interfaces and how
to use them in the go language, we started
with a discussion of the basics of interfaces,
so how to create them and how to implement
them. And we ended up with code that looks
something like this. So we're defining an
interface as a type. So we're going to start
with the type keyword, the name of the interface,
and then the keyword interface. And then inside
of curly braces, things are going to be a
little bit different than if we were defining
a struct. For example, if we were defining
a struct, we would put data fields inside
of the curly braces, because we're defining
the data that that structure is holding. With
interfaces. we're defining behaviors, however,
so instead of adding data fields, we're gonna
add method signatures. So we see here on this
example, we're going to define a write method
that accepts a slice of bytes, and returns
an integer and an error. And then we implement
that interface by creating a method on our
type that has the same signature. So we don't
have to explicitly state that we're implementing
the interface, we implement the interface
by implementing the interface by having the
methods there that match the type signature
for the interfaces methods, then we talked
about how to compose interfaces together,
and how this is a preferable approach versus
creating a single monolithic interface, if
you can break that interface down into smaller
types, and then compose them together. And
we did that something like this. So we're
going to create multiple interfaces. So we
have a writer interface and a closer interface.
And then when we compose them together, just
like when we compose structs, by embedding,
we can embed interfaces into one another.
So we can create a writer closer interface
that embeds the writer interface and the closer
interface. So to implement that writer closer
interface, you have to implement the right
method, because it's defined by the writer
interface. And you have to implement the closed
method as as defined by the closer interface.
So by doing this, you can actually pass smaller
chunks of your interface around your application.
So for example, if a method only needs a writer,
it doesn't need a closer, then you can actually
pass this writer closer as a writer, and it
worked just fine versus passing the entire
writer closer along, and potentially exposing
methods to the consumer that aren't really
necessary. Then we talked about type conversion
and how we can drill through the interface
to get at the underlying types in case we
need to work with those directly. So we had
an example here, where we created a writer
closure instance, and the underlying type
was a pointer to a buffered writer closer,
and how we could cast that back to a pointer
to a buffered writer closer by using this
syntax here, where we have a dot after the
object and then inside of print, we put the
type We want to cast to
know, we learned
that when we did this, if the type assertion
failed, then we're actually going to panic
or application. So remember to use that comma,
okay syntax, if you want to get a boolean
variable out that you can run tests against
to see if that type conversion succeeded.
And then we talked about the empty interface
and type switches. The empty interface is
nothing magic, it's just an interface to find
on the fly that has no methods on it. Now,
it's special in that every type in go implements
the empty interface. So you can store anything
you want in a variable of type empty interface.
And then very often, we're going to pair that
with what's called a type switch. And we see
an example of that here, where we're going
to use the switch keyword, we're going to
have the object and then dot and params, like
we do with a type assertion. But instead of
having a concrete type that we're asserting
against, we put the keyword type in there.
And then in our case statements, we're actually
going to put in the data type that we're asserting
against. So in this case, we're looking for
integers or strings, or we have a default
case, in case the value stored in i is neither
an integer nor a string. After that, we talked
about implementing with values versus pointers.
And we learned about a concept called method
sets. Now, when you're working with types
directly, you never have to think about this
because the methods are always all of the
methods assigned to that type. But with interfaces,
the rules change a little bit. The method
set of a value is all of the methods with
value receivers. So if you're going to try
and implement an interface with a value type,
than all of the methods that implement that
interface, have to have value receivers. With
pointers, things are a little bit more flexible,
because pointers always have access to the
underlying tape as well. The method sets for
a pointer is all of the methods regardless
of the receiver type, so all of the value
receivers, as well as all of the pointer receivers.
So pointer types are definitely more flexible
when you're implementing interfaces. Just
keep in mind, you don't want to assign pointer
receivers everywhere without thinking about
the idea that that gives access to the underlying
data of that type. And so that can allow methods
to alter that underlying data, even if you
don't want them to. So be careful when you
make that choice about using pointer receivers
or value receivers. The last thing that we
talked about were some best practices that
have evolved over the last few years about
using interfaces in the go language. And we
talked about use many smaller interfaces whenever
possible. And then if you need larger interfaces,
go ahead and compose those together with interface
composition. Don't export interfaces for types
that will be consumed. So if you're creating
a library, and somebody else is going to be
consuming a type, go ahead and publish that
concrete type out there don't create an interface,
assuming you know how people are going to
use it, allow them to create the interfaces
that your type will implement. That way, they
don't have to implement a whole bunch of methods
in their test suite that they never even use.
Do export interfaces for types that you will
be consuming however. So again, these two
points are exactly opposite of how you're
going to think about interfaces, if you're
coming from another language, such as C sharp
or Java, that have explicit implementation
of interfaces. So when you're defining a type
that you're going to be consuming in your
package, then go ahead and export interfaces.
That way whoever's using your package can
create their own concrete types, and implement
the interfaces that you need. So you don't
need to worry about the implementation, you
just need to worry about the behaviors that
they're exposing to you. And then, if possible,
define your functions and methods to receive
interfaces. Don't get too crazy with this.
So don't go over the top. Use common sense
with this. But if you have the option of receiving
interfaces, for example, if you don't need
access to the underlying data, then go ahead
and define an interface that you're going
to be receiving. That way it makes your methods
and functions more flexible. Since you can
have multiple implementations that you never
thought about at design time. And your functions
and methods will continue to work. Even when
those new concepts are thrown at your application,
I want to have a conversation about the tools
that we have available to implement concurrent
and parallel programming in the go language.
Now,
if you come this far in the series, or you've
done any research and go at all, concurrent
programming is one of the hottest topics that
is talked about, especially among people who
are learning to go language for the first
time. So we're going to talk about this concept
of a go routine, and how that enables us to
create efficient and highly concurrent applications.
We'll start our conversation by learning how
to create go routines themselves. So this
is going to be the basics of how we create
go routines and how we can work with them
a little bit. Then we'll move into a conversation
about synchronization. And we'll talk about
two concepts, weight groups and mutexes. And
how we can use those to get multiple go routines
to work together. Because one of the challenges
that we're going to have with go routines
is also one of the greatest advantages. Go
routines are going to allow our application
to work on multiple things at the same time.
However, you're often going to run into situations
where you need a certain bit of functionality
in your application to weight into one or
more of those concurrent calculations is complete.
So we'll talk about how to use synchronization
primitives in order to do that. Then we'll
move into a discussion of parallelism. Now
up to this point, our conversation is going
to be about concurrency in the go language.
And concurrency is just the ability of the
application to work on multiple things at
the same time, it doesn't mean it can work
on them at the same time, it just means it
has multiple things that it can be doing.
When we talk about parallelism, we'll talk
about how we can take our NGO applications
and enable them to work on those concurrent
calculations in parallel, or in other words,
introduce parallelism into our applications.
And finally, we're gonna wrap this video up
again, with a little section on best practices,
just to talk about some of the gotchas that
you can run into with concurrent and parallel
programming, and some of the tools that are
available to help keep your application safe
and away from those minefields. Okay, so let's
get started by talking about how to create
go routines. Okay, so the first thing that
you're going to notice is that we're in Visual
Studio code right now. Now, the reason for
that is while we can certainly play with go
routines in the playground, when we start
to get into parallelism, that's going to be
limited by the playground, because the playground
only enables us to use one core at a time.
So when we're running locally, we can use
as many cores as we want. So we can truly
run our applications in parallel. So some
of the things that I want to show you are
going to be easier to illustrate in this environment.
So the first thing that I want to show you
is how we can create our very first go routine.
So the first thing that we're going to need
to do is we're going to need to have a function
here. So I will create a function called Say
hello. And this is going to be a very simple
function, all it's going to do is well say
hello. So we'll start with that. And that's
going to be just enough for us to get started
seeing what's going to happen with our application.
So we can of course, call the say hello function
and call that from the main function. So we
can run this application by just using go
run and pointing it to that file. And of course,
it says hello, so no big surprises there.
Now, to turn this into a go routine, all we
have to do is in front of the function invocation,
just type the keyword go. Now what that's
going to do is that's going to tell go to
spin off what's called a green thread, and
run the say hello function in that green thread.
Now I need to take a little bit of a moment
here to talk about threads. most programming
languages that you've probably heard of and
worked with us, oh s threads are used operating
system threads. And what that means is that
they've got an individual function call stack
dedicated to the execution of whatever code
is handed to that thread. Now, traditionally,
these tend to be very, very large. They have,
for example, about one megabyte of RAM, they
take quite a bit of time for the application
to set up. And so you want to be very conservative
about how you use your threads. And that's
where you get into concepts of thread pooling
and things like that, because the creation
and destruction of threads is very expensive.
And so we want to avoid that in most programming
languages, such as Java, or C sharp. Now,
in go, it follows a little bit of a different
model. And as a matter of fact, the first
place I saw this model was used by the Erlang
language. And this is using what's called
Green threads. So instead of creating these
very massive heavy overhead threads, we're
going to create an abstraction of a thread
that we're going to call a go routine. Now,
inside of the go runtime, we've got a scheduler
that's going to map these go routines onto
these operating system threads for periods
of time, and the scheduler will then take
turns with every CPU thread that's available
and assign the different go routines, a certain
amount of processing time on those threads.
But we don't have to interact with those low
level threads directly. we're interacting
with these high level go routines. Now the
advantage of that is since we have this abstraction
go routines can start with very, very small
stack spaces, because they can be reallocated
very, very quickly. And so they're very cheap
to create and to destroy. So it's not uncommon
in a go application to see 1000s or 10s of
1000s of go routines running at the same time.
And the application is no problem with that
at all.
Now, if you compare that to other languages
that rely on operating system threads that
have one megabyte of overhead, there's no
way you're going to run 10,000 threads in
an environment like that. So by using go routines,
we get this nice lightweight abstraction over
a thread, and we no longer have to be afraid
of creating and destroying them. So anyway,
let's go ahead and run this and see what happens.
And it's going to be a little disappointing
because you notice that our message doesn't
print out. And the reason for that is our
main function is actually executing in a go
routine itself. So what we did here in line
six was we told the main function to spawn
another go routine, but the application exits
as soon as the main function is done. So as
soon as it spawn that go routine, it finished,
it didn't have any more work to do. So the
say hello function never actually had any
time available to it to print out its message.
So we can get around that a little bit by
using a horrible practice, but it's good enough
to get us started in understanding this. So
we'll just put an arbitrary sleep calling
here in order to get the main function to
delay a little bit Now when we run the application,
we see that we do get our Hello message printed
out. Now, as opposed to our first run of this,
it's not actually the main function that's
executing this code. It's a go routine that
we're spawning off from the main function.
And that's what's responsible for printing
out the message. Okay, now, this is a pretty
typical use case of go routine where we're
using the go routine to invoke a function.
But we don't have to do that. As a matter
of fact, let me just drop in this example
here, which is basically the same, except
for instead of using a named function, I'm
using this anonymous function here. So notice
that I've got this anonymously declared function,
and I'm invoking it immediately. And I'm launching
it with go routine. Now, what's interesting
about it is I'm printing out the message variable
that I've defined up here on line nine, down
here inside of the go routine. So if I run
this, we do in fact, see that it works. Now
the reason that it works is go has the concept
of closures, which means that this anonymous
function actually does have access to the
variables in the outer scope. So it can take
advantage of this MSG variable that we declared
up here on line nine, and use it inside of
the go routine. Even though the go routine
is running with a completely different execution
stack. The go runtime understands where to
get that MSG variable, and it takes care of
it for us. Now, the problem with this is that
we've actually created a dependency between
the variable in the main function and the
variable in the go routine. So to illustrate
how that can be a problem. Let me modify the
example just a little bit. So I'm declaring
the variable message and setting it equal
to Hello, and then printing it out in the
go routine. And then right after I launched
the go routine, right here on line 13, I'm
reassigning the variable to goodbye. So if
I go ahead and run this, you'll see that we
in fact, get goodbye printed out in the go
routine, not Hello, like you might expect
based on how the program is written. And the
reason for that. And it's not always going
to be guaranteed to execute this way. But
most of the time, the ghost scheduler is not
going to interrupt the main thread until it
hits this sleep call on line 14. Which means
even though it launches another go routine
on line 10, it doesn't actually give
it any love yet, it's still executing the
main function. And so it actually gets to
line 13 and reassigns, the value of the message
variable before the go routine has a chance
to print it out. And this is actually creating
what's called a race condition. And we'll
come back and talk about race conditions at
the end of this video. But this is a bad thing.
And generally, it's something that you want
to avoid, so that you can access variables
via the closure, it's generally not a good
idea to do that. So if that's not a good idea,
what are your other options? Well, notice
that we have a function here. And this is
just a function invocation, there's nothing
special about it, just because we put the
go keyword in front of it, it's just a function.
So functions can take arguments. So what happens
if we add a message argument here, and then
down in the prints, where we're actually invoking
the function? What if we pass in the message
parameter? Well, since we're passing this
in by value, so we're actually going to copy
the string hello into the function, then we've
actually decoupled the message variable in
the main function from the go routine, because
now, this message that's going to print out
is actually a copy that we're passing in when
we're invoking the function for the go routine.
So now if we run this, we see that we get
Hello printed out. So this is generally the
way that you're going to want to pass data
into your go routines, use arguments to do
that, and really intend for the variables
to be coupled together. Now, this example
so far is working. But it's really not best
practice. And the reason it's not best practice
is because we're using this sleep call. So
we're actually binding the applications performance
and the applications clock cycles to the real
world clock. And that's very unreliable. So
in order to get your applications to work,
you're typically going to have to sleep for
a very long time relative to the average performance
time in order to get the performance to be
reliable. So we don't want to use sleep calls
in production, at least not for something
like this. So what are the other alternatives?
Well, one of the other alternatives that we
have is to use what's called a weight group.
So let's go ahead and add one in. And then
while we're doing that, we'll talk about what
they are. So I'm going to create another variable.
And it looks like my auto formatting just
helped me here. And we'll pull that from the
sync package. And we'll create an object of
type weight group. So I just need to put my
curly braces here to initialize it. Now what
a weight group does is it's designed to synchronize
multiple go routines together. So in this
application, we've got two go routines that
we care about, we've got the go routine that's
executing the main function. And we've got
this go routine that we're spawning off here
on line 13. So what we want to do is we want
to synchronize the main function to this anonymous
go routine. So we're going to do that by telling
the weight group that we've got another go
routine that we wanted to synchronize to it
starts off synchronizing to zero. And so we're
going to add one because we want to tell it
that we're going to synchronize to this go
Right here. Now once it's done, we don't need
this line anymore. Once it's done, we're going
to go ahead and exit the application. And
we will do that by just waiting on the weight
group. And we do that by using the weight
method right here. Now when the go routine
is done, then it can tell the weight group
that it's actually completed its execution.
And we do that by using the done method. So
if we execute that, basically, what that's
going to do is it's going to decrement, the
number of groups that the weight group is
waiting on. And since we added one, and it's
going to decrement by one to be down to zero,
and then the weight method will say, Okay,
it's time for us to go ahead and finish up
our application run. So if I save this off,
and I go ahead and run it, we see in fact
that our application is performing as it did
before. But now it's taking just enough time
to complete the execution. We're not relying
on the rolling clock anymore, and having to
Jimmy run with variables and hope that everything
stays consistent. Now, in this example, we're
just synchronizing to go routines together.
But only one of the go routines is really
doing any work. The main function in this
example is just storing data, and spawning
other go routines. But we can have multiple
go routines that are working on the same data.
And we might need to synchronize those together.
And that can be a little bit tricky. So let
me drop in this example here, and we'll talk
about it. So I'm creating weight group again,
up here on line eight. And then I'm initializing
a counter variable. inside of my main function,
I'm actually spawning 20 go routines, because
inside of this for loop, each time I run through,
I add two to the weight group to let it know
there are two more go routines that are running.
And then I spawn a say hello, and then I spawn
an increment here. And then I just have a
wait method call here on line 17, just to
make sure that the main function doesn't exit
out too early now and say hello, all I'm going
to do is I'm going to print out Hello, and
I'm going to print out the counter value.
And then in the increment function down here,
I'm just going to increment the counter by
one. Now after each one of those is done,
I'm going to call the done method on the weight
group. And everything should be just fine.
Now notice that I've broken my own rule here,
the weight group is actually being accessed
globally in this application. And that makes
sense, because I actually do want to share
this object, and the weight group
is safe to use concurrently like this. It's
designed to be using this way. So let's go
ahead and run this application and see what's
going to happen. So our intuition says that
we're going to print say, Hello. So it should
print say hello, zero, because the counters
value is zero right here. And then it's going
to increment it. And then it's going to say
hello, again, it's going to increment it.
So should say hello, number zero, hello, number
one, hello, number two, and so on. So let's
go ahead and run this and see what happens.
And we see that we get a mess, we in fact,
don't have any kind of reliable behavior going
on here, we printed one twice, and then 2345.
So that seemed to work consistently. And then
we jumped all the way to nine, we printed
10 out twice, and then we went back to nine
for some reason. And if we run this again,
we'll get a completely different result. So
what's happening here is our go routines are
actually racing against each other. So we
have no synchronization between the go routines,
they're just going hell bent for leather,
and going as fast as they can to accomplish
the work that we've asked them to do, regardless
of what else is going on in the application.
So in order to correct this, we need to find
a way to synchronize these guys together.
Now, we could probably find a way to use a
weight group on this. But we've already talked
about weight groups. So I want to talk about
another way to do this. So we're going to
introduce this concept of a mutex. So with
a mutex. let me paste this example in here,
and then we'll talk about what it does. But
a mutex is basically a lock that the application
is going to honor.
Now in this case, you see on line 11, I'm
creating what's called an rW mutex, which
is a read write mutex. Now a simple mutex
is simply locked or unlocked. So if the mutex
is locked, and something tries to manipulate
that value, it has to wait until the mutex
is unlocked. And they can obtain the mutex
lock itself. So what we can do with that is
we can actually protect parts of our code
so that only one entity can be manipulating
that code at a time. And typically what we're
going to use that for is to protect data to
ensure that only one thing can access the
data at a single time. With an rW mutex, we've
changed things a little bit. We've basically
said as many things as want to can read this
data, but only one can write it at a time.
And if anything is reading, then we can't
write to it at all. So we can have an infinite
number of readers, but only one writer. And
so when something comes in and makes a write
request, it's going to wait till all the readers
are done. And then the writer is going to
lock the mutex. So nothing can read it or
write it until the writer is done. So in this
modification, actually, I don't want to talk
about that line yet. We'll come back and revisit
that. So in this modification, what I've done
here is I'm attempting to use a mutex to synchronize
things together. So the modification is down
here in my say, Hello, I'm just reading the
value of the counter variable. And that's
what I'm trying to protect. I'm trying to
protect the counter variable from concurrent
reading and writing because that's what was
getting us into trouble. So on line 22, I
obtained a read lock on the mutex and then
I print out my message and And then I released
that lock using the R unlock method. Now in
the increment, that's where I'm actually mutating
the data. So I need to write lock. And so
I'm going to call the lock method on the mutex,
increment the value. And then I'm going to
call unlock. Now, if I run this application,
I actually haven't gotten quite where I want
to be. So I don't get the weird random behavior
that I was seeing before. But you notice that
something seems to be out of sync still, because
I get Hello, one, hello, two, and then it
stays at two. And if I keep running, this
actually can get different behaviors. But
notice that I'm always going in the proper
order. So I fixed part of my problem, but
I haven't fixed all of it yet. So I can keep
running. Actually, that one got pretty close.
But there's obviously something else going
on here. With the reason that we have an issue
here is we're still working within the go
routines. So if this say hello, function gets
executed twice by its go routines, and the
increment function doesn't get called in between.
That's where we get this behavior here, where
we actually get the same message printing
out twice, because we don't have a chance
to lock this mutex before we try and read
it that second time. So the way to address
this is we actually have to lock the mutex
outside of the context of the go routine.
So we have a reliable execution model. So
let's go ahead and paste in a small modification
here. Now all I've done is I've moved the
locks out here. So the locks are now executing
before each go routine executes. And then
I unlock them when the go routine is done.
So if I run this, we actually see that I now
get the behavior that I expect, I see zero
through nine printed out. And if I run it
again, and I run it again, and run it again,
everything is working great. So the reason
that this is working is I'm actually locking
the mutex is in a single context. So the main
function is actually executing the locks.
And then asynchronously, I'll unlock them
once I'm done with the asynchronous operation.
Now the problem with this application is I
basically have completely destroyed concurrency
and parallelism in this application. Because
all of these mutexes are forcing the data
to be synchronized and run in a single threaded
way. So any potential benefits that I would
get from the go routines are actually gone.
As a matter of fact, this application probably
performs worse than one without go routines,
because I'm mucking around with this mutex.
And I'm constantly locking it and unlocking
it. So this is an example where if this is
all that this application needed to do, we
would actually be much better served by removing
the go routines, and just running this with
a single execution path and removing any concurrency
at all. However, there are often situations
where you can get a significant advantage
by running things in parallel. And so you
can use weight groups, or mutex is in order
to synchronize things together, and make sure
that your data is protected, and everything
is playing well together. Now I have this
line in here, and I apologize for that I really
shouldn't have had that in these earlier examples.
But I do want to talk about this function
from the runtime package called go max procs.
So in modern versions of go, if you look at
this go max procs variable, let's just go
ahead and execute this simple program, all
it's going
to do is it's going to tell me the number
of threads that are available. So it prints
out that there are four threads available
in the application ends. Matter of fact, let
me just add this carriage return in here and
run this again, that way things look a little
better. And you see that I have four threads
available. So by default, what go is going
to do is it's going to give you the number
of operating system threads equal to the number
of cores that are available on the machine.
So in this virtual machine, I've exposed four
cores to the VM.
So I have by default four oh s threads that
I can work with. Now, I can change that value
to anything I want. So for example, I can
change that to one. And now my application
is running single threaded. So now I have
a truly concurrent application with no parallelism
at all. So this can be useful in situations
where there's a lot of data synchronization
going on. And you really need to be careful
to avoid any kind of race conditions that
parallelism can incur. And maybe there's no
better way to do it. Now, I would say there's
an architecture problem there. But it is possible
to run an application in a single threaded
way, by setting go max procs equal to one.
Now if you're wondering what this negative
one does, when you invoke the go max procs
function, it actually returns the number of
threads that were previously set. And if you
pass a negative number, then it doesn't change
the values. So this go max procs, negative
one, all that's doing is that's letting us
interrogate how many threads we have available.
Now we can also set this to for example, 100.
There's nothing stopping us from creating
a massive number of operating system threads.
Now what I found in working with NGO is that
go max procs is a tuning variable for you
to work with. So the general advice is one
operating system thread per core is a minimum.
But a lot of times you'll actually find that
your application will get faster by increasing
go max procs beyond that value. Now if you
get up too high Like, for example, 100, then
you can run into other problems, because now
you've got additional memory overhead. Because
you're maintaining 100 operating system threads,
your scheduler has to work harder because
it's got all these different threads to manage.
And so eventually, the performance peaks and
it starts to fall back off, because your application
is constantly rescheduling go routines on
different threads. And so you're losing time
every time that occurs. So as you get your
application closer to production, I would
encourage you definitely develop with go max
procs greater than one because you want to
reveal those race conditions as early as possible.
But just before you release to production,
you might want to run your application through
a performance test suite with varying values
of go max procs, to see where it's going to
perform the best. Now, the last thing that
I want to talk about are some best practices
to keep in mind when you're working with go
routines in the go language. So let's take
a look at those next. Go routines in the go
language are very powerful, and it can be
easy to let them get a little bit out of hand.
So I want to go through and give you some
advice on how to work with go routines in
your own applications. The first bit of advice
is, if you're working in a library, be very,
very careful about creating go routines yourself,
because generally, it's better to let the
consumer control the concurrency of the library,
not the library itself. If you force your
library to work concurrently, then that can
actually cause your consumers to have more
problems synchronizing data together. So in
general, keep things simple, keep things single
threaded, and let the consumer of your library
decide when to use a go routine and when not
to now, this advice can be softened a little
bit, if you have a function called that's
going to return a channel that will return
the result, then having the go routine in
there might not be such a bad thing, because
your consumer never really has to worry about
how that unit of work is getting done. They
don't really care if it's running concurrently
or not. Because they are just going to be
listening for the result on a channel. But
we haven't talked about channels yet. So we'll
revisit that topic in the next video. But
for now, if you're creating a library, trying
to avoid go routines, at least go routines
that are going to be surface to the consumer
and have them forced to work with them. When
you create a go routine, know how it's going
to end. Now we're gonna see how to do this
a little bit more when we talk about channels.
But it's really easy to have a go routine
launched as kind of a watch or go routine.
So it's going to be just sitting out there
listening for messages to come in. And it's
going to process those messages as they arrive.
However, if you don't have a way to stop that
go routine, that go routine is going to continue
on for ever. And so it's constantly going
to be a drain on the resources of your application.
And eventually, as the go routine ages, it
could even cause other issues and cause your
application to crash. The other thing that
I want to give you some advice about is check
for race conditions at compile time. So I
want to jump back over to the editor and show
you how to do that. But it's very important
and very simple to do in most environments
that go runs in. So let's jump over to the
editor and take a look at that in order to
see if we don't have to go any further than
this example. Now I know this is right from
the beginning of the video, and it's got sleeps
in there. And it's got some bad practices.
But if you remember, if we run this application,
then it prints goodbye instead of the Hello
message that we originally printed. So how
could we have detected this without running
the application? Well, you might not think
it's terribly important to be able to do that.
Because it's obvious, we've got some kind
of a problem here. And all we have to do is
apply our debugging skills. But there are
other cases where this is very, very subtle
and very, very hard to track down without
a little bit of help. Well, fortunately, the
go compiler has quite a bit of help available
to you. And it's as simple to invoke as just
adding a dash race flag to go run, go install,
go build whatever you're using to get your
application up and running. So let's go ahead
and try that and see what it says about our
little application here. And you notice it
does run the application because we invoked
go run so we see goodbye printed here. But
notice what we got up here we got this data
race message. So it's telling us it sees that
the same area of data is being accessed by
two different executing go routines. So it
says the first one that it found was in go
routine six which an internal identifier unless
we're profiling, we've got no idea what goroutine
six is, but it does tell us it was invoked
on line 11. So apparently in this run, go
routine six was this go routine right here.
And it was accessing the MSG variable. It
also sees that we access the MSG variable
on line 13, which is in our main function.
And so by adding the dash race flag, we get
all of this additional information where the
go compiler itself, analyzes our application
and tries to determine if we have any race
conditions. So I would strongly encourage
you if you get any kind of concurrency at
all in your application, you're going to want
to run this because it's very simple check
it runs very, very quickly. And it's going
to help you prevent very subtle bugs from
getting into your production code.
Okay, so that's what I have to talk about.
With go routines, maybe you are expecting
more. But go routines are really quite simple.
Now when we get into our next conversation,
which will be about channels, things get a
little bit more complicated, but go routines
are relatively straightforward. So let's go
into a summary and review what we've talked
about in this video. In this video, we learned
about go routines and how we can use them
to create concurrent and parallel execution
paths in our applications. We started by learning
how to create go routines themselves. And
we learned that by adding the go keyword in
front of a function call, we've created a
go routine. And that's all that it takes.
There's no special semantics, there's no special
things that need to be done. It's simply a
function call with the keyword go in front
of it. Now when we're using anonymous functions,
we in general want to pass data as local variables.
So you want to add a parameter into that anonymous
function and pass data into the go routine,
instead of relying on the closures to prevent
any kind of race conditions as you try and
manipulate that data. And that's not always
true. We saw with weight groups that we access
that globally, because that was our intention,
we truly did want that to be available in
multiple scopes. But even then we could pass
a pointer in, in order to be very clear about
what information that go routine should have
access to. Then we talked about the different
ways that we can synchronize multiple go routines
together, one of the challenges that we have
with go routines is now we've got all sorts
of things happening. And there's no way to
ensure without synchronization, how they're
going to interact with one another. Now for
a lot of concurrent calculations, that's not
a problem at all, because the two might not
be related to one another. But often you get
into situations where you're relying on the
result of multiple calculations, or something
needs to know the result of the work that's
been done, or you've got a shared memory issue.
And you need to make sure that those go routines
aren't trying to manipulate the same data
at the same time. So we can use weight groups
to wait for groups of go routines to complete.
So we saw that we have three methods that
are interesting. There, we have the Add method
to inform the weight group that there are
more go routines for it to wait on, we have
the weight method that's going to block the
go routine that is called on until the weight
group is completed. And then we have the done
method available on that weight group that
lets the weight group know that one of the
go routines is completed with its work.
We also talked about the mutex and the rW
mutex, and how those are generally used to
protect data. So if you have a piece of data
that's going to be accessed in multiple locations
in your application, then you can protect
that access by using a mutex or an rW mutex.
To ensure that only one go routine is manipulating
that data at one time. We then talked about
parallelism and how parallelism can introduce
some really tricky challenges into your go
applications. We talked about how by default
go will use the number of CPU threads equal
to the number of available cores on the computer
that is running on. We talked about how we
can change that by using the go max procs
function from the runtime package. And we
talked about how more threads will generally
increase performance. But too many can actually
slow it down. So in general, if you're developing
an application, you want to start from day
one with go max procs greater than one to
find any concurrency and any race conditions
early on in your application development.
But don't settle on a final number until right
as you get close to production and you have
a performance test suite that you can work
with. To find out what the best value for
go max procs is for your application. Because
while the starting number is a very good number
to start with, a lot of applications actually
perform better with a value higher or lower
than that default value. And finally, we wrapped
up with a discussion of some best practices
to keep in mind when you're working with go
routines. We learned that if you're a library
developer, you should avoid the creation of
go routines that are going to be exposed to
the consumer of your library. Let the consumer
control the concurrency of your application
because they're the ones that are in the best
place to know if something needs to be executed
single threaded, or if it can be executed
concurrently. When creating a go routine,
know how it's going to end. It's very easy
to get into situations where go routines start
leaking memory because they're never cleaned
up because they never quite get done with
their work. Now normally a go routine is killed
as soon as it finishes its execution. And
we saw that with the main function, the main
function runs in a go routine. And that go
routine terminates as soon as the main function
exits. We also saw in our say hello function,
as soon as it printed its message out and
the function exited. That go routine was killed
and it was cleaned out. So it was very clear
when those go routines life cycle is going
to be over. However, if you've got go routines
that are listening for messages in a continuous
loop, then make sure that you code in a way
to shut those go routines down so that once
you're done using them and clean up the memory
that they're using. Also, as you're going
along with your application development, check
for race conditions, it's not that hard to
do. You just have to add dash race onto the
go command that's compiling your application.
And then the go compiler is going to analyze
your application and try and locate places
in it that have the potential of access Seeing
the same memory at the same time, or in an
unsynchronized way, causing very subtle and
potentially very disastrous bugs where your
application when it gets to production. Over
the course of this video series, we've talked
about a lot of structures and techniques and
tools that are available. In order to get
started successfully programming with the
go language. Well, I want to wrap up that
discussion in this video by talking about
one of the features that makes go really stand
out when you're looking for different languages
to work with. And that is this concept of
channels. Now most programming languages that
are out there, were originally designed with
a single processing core in mind. And so when
concurrency and parallelism came into play,
they were really kind of bolted on to the
side. And so a lot of times, you're actually
going to be working with third party libraries
and packages in order to help with data synchronization
and things like that. Well go was born in
a multiprocessor world. So every computer
that was out there when go was invented, had
more than one processing core. So it made
sense as the language was being designed to
consider concurrency and parallelism from
the beginning. Now in the last video, we talked
about go routines, and how go abstracts the
concept of a thread into this higher concept
called a go routine to allow hundreds or 1000s
or even 10s of 1000s of things to be going
on in your application at the same time. On
this video, we're going to be talking about
channels, and how those can be used to pass
data between different go routines in a way
that is safe, and prevents issues such as
race conditions, and memory sharing problems
that can cause issues in your application
that are very difficult to debug.
So we're going to start this talk by talking
about the basics of channels. So we'll talk
about how to create them, how we can use them
how we can pass data through them, then we'll
talk about how we can restrict data flow.
Now a basic channel is a two way street, we
can send data in and we can get data out.
But that's not always what you want to be
able to do with the channel. Sometimes you
want to send only channel or receive only
channel. And we'll talk about how to do that
in the second section. Then we'll talk about
buffered channels, and how we can actually
design channels to have an internal data store
so that they can store several messages at
once just in case the sender and the receiver
aren't processing data at the same rate. Then
we'll talk about how we can close channels
once we're done with them. We'll then revisit
the topic of four range loops. And we'll learn
how we can use channels with a four range
loop. And then we'll wrap up our discussion
by talking about SELECT statements, which
is kind of like a switch statement, but specifically
designed to work in the context of a channel.
Okay, so let's go ahead and dive in and learn
the basics of working with channels.
So when we're working with channels in the
go language, we're almost always going to
be working with them in the context of go
routines. And the reason is because channels
are really designed to synchronize data transmission
between multiple go routines. So let's go
ahead and get started by creating some go
routines. Well, actually, the first thing
that I need to do is I need to create a weight
group. Because as you remember from the last
video, we use weight groups in order to synchronize
go routines together. So we're going to use
the weight group to synchronize the go routines
to make sure that our main routine waits for
all of our other go routines to finish. And
then we're going to use channels in order
to synchronize the data flow between them.
So we got two different synchronization mechanisms
going on in this little application. The next
thing we need to do is we need to create a
channel. Now channels are created with the
built in make function. And there really is
no shortcut around this. Now a lot of uses
of the make function, you can actually use
other forms. When you're creating a channel,
there's enough internal mechanisms that need
to fire that you have to use the make function
in order to allow the runtime to properly
set up the channel for you. Now on the simplest
form of the make function with working with
channels, we're going to use the channel keyword
to say that we want to create a channel. And
then we're going to provide the data type
that's going to flow through the channel.
Now you can pick any data type that you want,
we're just going to be using integers here.
But keep in mind that this means that the
channel is strongly typed, you can only send
integers through this channel that we're creating
here. Similarly, if we provided strings, we
could only pass in strings. If you provided
pointers to integers, you can only send in
pointers to integer, you get the general idea.
So when you create a channel, you're going
to create that channel to accept messages
of a certain type. And it's only ever going
to receive them send messages of that type.
Now in this initial example, we're going to
have to go routines, I'm going to spawn so
I'm going to add two items to my wait group.
And then we'll go ahead and create those go
routines, and then we'll talk about those.
So let me just drop in the rest of the code
here. And you can see my first go routine
is an anonymous function actually both of
the marm and this first one is going to be
receiving data from the channel. So this go
routine is actually going to be my receiving
go routine. And then this channel is actually
going to be my sending go routine. So the
way that we send a message into a channel
is as you see here, we're going to use this
arrow syntax, so we're going to use a less
than and a dash, and when we're putting data
into the channel we list the channel first,
then we have this arrow and then the data
that we want to pass in. So imagine that the
arrow is pointing in the direction that we
want the data to flow. So we want the data
to flow into the channel, and so the arrow
is pointing toward the channel. Similarly,
if we want to receive data from the channel,
then we're going to put the arrow on the other
side. So we're going to use that same less
than and dash, but it's going to be before
the channel. And so we're going to be pulling
data from the channel. So in this line right
here, on line 14, we're going to be receiving
data from the channel and assigning it to
the variable i. And then after we're done,
we're going to call the done method on our
weight groups. And we're just going to print
the value out. So all we're doing here is
this go routine is going to be sending the
value 42, this go routine is going to be receiving
whatever value comes out of the channel, which
in this case, of course, will be 42. And it's
going to print that out to the console. So
let's go ahead and run that. And we see that
in fact, it does work. So the nice thing about
doing this is since we're sending a copy of
the data to the channel, we could manipulate
the variable assigned here. So for example,
we could actually start this off with I set
equal to 42. And we can pass in I and then
afterwards, we can reassign I, and it doesn't
matter because like with all other variable
operations and go, when we're passing data
into the channel, we're actually going to
pass a copy of the data. So when we manipulate
it afterwards, the receiving go routine doesn't
really care that we change the value of the
variable, it's not affected by that at all.
Now another common use case for go routines
is if you have data that's asynchronously
processed, so maybe you can generate the data
very, very quickly, but it takes time to process
it. Or maybe it takes a long time to generate
that data. So you've got multiple generators,
but it can be processed very quickly. So you
might want to have a different number of go
routines that are sending data into a channel,
then you have receiving. So let's take a look
at how we can do that. So it's a slight modification
to the example that we just went through,
instead of just having the go routines fire
once, I'm actually creating go routines inside
of this loop here. So I'm going to create
five sets of go routines. So each one of the
groups is going to have a sender like we have
here, which is exactly what we had before.
And then we're going to have a receiver, which
is again, just like we had before. So by the
time the application is done, we're going
to spawn 10 go routines here, five senders
and five receivers, and all of them are going
to be using this single channel to communicate
their messages across. So if we go ahead and
run this, we see that we do get five messages
received.
Okay, so this works out really well, well,
but I will warn you, if you start playing
around with this, and you decide to start
moving the senders and receivers to make them
asymmetrical, things won't work very well.
So one of the things you might want to do
to play with this example is take this go
routine, and move it outside of the for loop.
So you're gonna have one receiver and multiple
senders at the end of this, well, that actually
isn't going to work right now. Because if
you think about how this go routine is going
to process, it's going to receive the message
coming in from the channel, it's going to
print and then it's going to exit, but then
down here in the loop, we're actually going
to spawn five messages into that channel.
So we can only receive one, but we're sending
five. And if we run this, we're actually going
to run into a problem. And that is we see
all routines are asleep, that we have a deadlock
condition. And the reason for that is because
we have these go routines down here that are
trying to push messages into the channel.
But there's nothing that can process them.
Now an important thing to keep in mind here
is the reason that this is a deadlock. And
the reason for that is this line of code here
is actually going to pause the execution of
this go routine right at this line until there's
a space available in the channel. So by default,
we're working with unbuffered channels, which
means only one message can be in the channel
at one time. So our first go routine in this
loop gets happily spun up, it pushes a message
into the channel, and then it exits and then
calls this done method on the weight group.
And then that message gets processed by this
go routine here and everything's happy. However,
this go routine then exits. And then our next
go routine comes along and tries to push another
message in. Well, it blocks right on this
statement. And there's nothing in our application
that's going to receive that message. And
that's why we see the go runtime. Notice that
and it's going to kill the application because
it notices that we have a problem, and it
doesn't know how to resolve it. Now I want
to go back to our previous example. And actually
I'm going to modify things slightly here.
Because I want to show you that notice that
we're just working with the raw channel. So
this is perfectly valid code for us to write.
As a matter of fact, if I go ahead and run
this, we see that we get two messages printed
out but look at how that's happening. So this
go routine is pushing a message into the channel.
That message is then being received up in
this go routine and printed out this go routine
then the one that received this message is
then putting a message back into the channel.
And that is then being received down here
and this go routine, which is then printing
the message out. So both of these go routines
are actually as readers and writers, now that
may be a situation that you want, but very
often, you want to actually dedicate a go
routine to either reading from a channel or
writing to a channel. So in order to do that,
what we're going to do is we're actually going
to pass in the channel with a bias on the
direction that is going to be able to work
with. So the way we're going to do that is
by accepting variables in our go routines.
So we'll start with this first one here. And
we want this to be a receive only channel.
So the way we're going to do that is we want
data to flow out of the channel. So you notice
we're using that similar syntax, we're going
to list the type of the channel, and then
we're going to have this arrow coming out
of it. So data is flowing out of the channel.
And so this is going to be a receive only
channel. Similarly, if we want a send only
channel, we're going to give it the variable
name, we're going to say that it's a channel,
now we put the Send only operator right here,
and then we put the data type. So this is
going to be sending data into the channel
only. And this is going to be receiving data
from the channel. And then of course, we have
to pass the channel into the go routines as
arguments. So when we run this, we're actually
going to get an error. And the reason we get
an error is because we're trying to pass data
into this channel. But this is a receive only
channel. So it's invalid to send data into
it. And then similarly, we have an error down
here on line 21, because we're trying to receive
data from the Send only channel. So if we
go ahead and wipe out these lines here, this
line, and this line, and run, then everything
works as it did before. But now it's much
more clear what the data flow is in the go
routine, we know that we're going to be receiving
data on one side, and we're going to be sending
data on the other. Now something that's a
little unusual with this is notice that we're
passing in a bi directional channel. So this
is just a normal channel, and we're receiving
it a little bit differently. So this kind
of feels like a little bit of polymorphic
behavior. And this is a special aspect of
channels, the runtime understands this syntax.
And so it actually is going to, I'm going
to use the word cast here, it's going to cast
this bi directional channel into a unidirectional
channel. But that's not something you can
generally do in the go language. That is something
that is specific to channels. Now one of the
problems we ran into on a previous example
is we had a situation where we tried to push
five messages into a channel, but we only
had one receiver. And we noticed that the
application deadlock, well, we can get around
that in a couple of different ways. Now I'm
going to show you one way to get around that
that really is nice deal for solving that
problem. But I will talk about the problem
that it is solving. And that is by using buffered
channels. So if I go ahead and paste in this
example, here, we will see an example of the
problem we might run into. I've simplified
it a little bit from the previous example
we ran into. So we've got our initial example
where we've got a receive only go routine,
we've got a send only go routine. But in our
send go routine, we're actually sending two
messages. But since we're only receiving one,
we expect that we're going to run into a problem.
So let's go ahead and run this. And we see
that we do in fact have a problem, we received
the 42 out and printed it. But there's nothing
to deal with this message here that's in the
channel. And so the application blows up,
because this go routine can never complete,
because it's blocked on this line. So we need
a way to get around that. Now a simple way
to get around that is by simply adding a buffer
here. So if we add a second parameter to the
make function up here, and provide an integer,
that's actually going to tell go to create
a channel that's got an internal data store
that can store in this case, 50 integers.
Now what that's going to do is it's actually
going to allow our application to complete.
But we do have a little bit of a problem here
because this message is lost. So it did eliminate
the panic. And I guess in one way, you could
say it solved the problem. But it did create
another problem in that we lost this message.
Now this isn't the problem that buffer channels
are really intended to solve. But I do want
to show you that it does create that internal
store, so we can receive multiple messages
back out. As a matter of fact, what we can
do is we can just copy this line down here
and reformat this, and we don't need this
column right here. And if we run this, we
see that we do get both messages printed back
out. Now what a buffered channel is really
designed to do is if the sender or the receiver
operate at a different frequency than the
other side. So you can imagine if we had a
data acquisition system, and maybe we retrieve
data from our sensors, and a burst transmission,
so maybe we're acquiring data from seismometers,
and we're monitoring earthquakes, well, maybe
those seismometers in order to conserve power,
don't send their data continuously, they're
going to send a burst transmission, maybe
once an hour. So every hour, we're going to
get a burst transmission that maybe last five
or six seconds, that's going to contain the
entire hours worth of data. So in that case,
our sender is going to be inundated with data
when that burst happens. And it's going to
have to have a way to deal with it, one of
the receivers might take a little while to
process that data. So in that case, what we
might want to do is create a buffer here of
these signals that are coming in from our
seismometer, that's going to be able to accept
that one hours worth of data. And then our
receivers can pull that data off, as they're
able to process it, and keep things working
smoothly, so that the channel that's receiving
the data from our sensors, doesn't get locked
up, because it doesn't have a place to put
the next message. So that's really what buffered
go routines are designed to work with, is
when your sender or your receiver needs a
little bit more time to process. And so you
don't want to block the other side, because
you have a little bit of a delay there. Now
if this isn't the right way to handle this
situation, what is the right way? Well, the
way that we typically handle something that's
going to happen multiple times, such as passing
a message into a channel, is by using some
kind of a looping construct. And that's no
different with channels as is with anything
else. So let's paste in this example, where
I instead of processing the message once and
then having this first go routine exit, I'm
actually going to use a for range loop. But
notice what I'm arranging over,
instead of ranging over some kind of a collection,
such as an array, a slice or a map, I'm actually
ranging over the channel. Now the syntax changes
just a little bit. Because if this were a
slice, the first index that we pull back is
going to be the index in the slice. And then
the second variable we pulled out, if we had,
for example, a second variable here would
be the value. Well, when you're arranging
over a channel, things are a little bit different.
When you pull a single value, you're actually
going to get the value that's coming out of
the channel. And so if we run this, we see
that we do in fact get 42 and 27. But we still
have a deadlock condition. So what's causing
that deadlock condition? Well, before we had
this four range loop, we actually deadlocked
this go routine right here, and everything
died. We're in our new application, we're
actually deadlocking in the four range loop.
And the reason for that is because we're continuing
to monitor for additional messages, but we
stopped sending messages. And so now this
four range loop doesn't know how to exit.
And so this go routine is now causing the
deadlock condition. So we've improved the
situation, we kind of move the needle where
we're no longer dead locking in our sender,
but we are still dead locking in our receiver.
So how do we handle that? Well, the way that
we're going to handle that is we have to understand
how the four range loop works. So if you're
using a for range, loop over a slice, how
many times does that iterate? Well, it executes
the loop once for every item in the slice.
So if you've got a slice with five elements
in it, you're going to run through the four
range loop five times, well, how many elements
are in a channel? Well, there can be an infinite
number of elements in a channel because you
can constantly push a new message into it.
So what is the way to signal a four range
loop with a channel that there are no more
messages coming? Well, the answer is we need
to close the channel. So anything that has
access to the channel can do this, we're going
to use the built in close function. And we're
going to pass in the channel like you see
here. So what we're doing on our sending side
is we're passing in two messages, we're passing
in 42, and 27. And then we're letting the
channel know we're done working with you.
So we're going to go ahead and close the channel,
this four range loop is going to detect that.
And when we run this, now everything runs
well, because we're passing in the message
42, that gets processed in the for loop, we're
passing in 27, that gets processed, then we
close the channel, that gets processed by
the for range loop, which notices that the
channel is closed, and it's going to exit
and it's going to terminate the loop. So when
we terminate the loop, then we call the done
method on the weight group. And then we exit
the go routine, all of our go routines exit
properly, and we have no more
deadlocks.
Now we do have to be a little bit careful
in closing channels, because when you close
a channel, you really have to mean that you're
closing the channel down. So let's try closing
the channel right here and then pushing another
message into it. So if we run this, we actually
get a bad thing happening. So in this case,
the application panicked. And why did it panic,
because we tried to send a message on a closed
channel. So the issue here is we close the
channel right here on line 21. And then on
line 22, we tried to pass another message
into it. So that is a no, no, you are not
allowed to pass a message into a closed channel
because the channel is closed. So you might
ask, Well, how do I recover from this? How
do I reopen the channel or undo that or whatever?
And the answer is, you can't. As a matter
of fact, you can't even detect if a channel
is closed, except for by looking for the application
panicking. So call that a limitation of the
go language or not, I don't know. But you
do have to be very careful that when you close
a channel, nothing else is going to send a
message into it. So if that is a possibility,
then the only option you really have is to
have a deferred function and use a recover
in there to recover from the panic that gets
thrown because in this situation, you will
have a panic and there is no way to avoid
it. So if in your application, that's a situation
that's likely to happen, then again, you're
going to have to use that recover function.
And you can review the video where I talked
about using those. Now on the receiving side,
we do have a little bit of a different story
here, because this issue is on the closing
side. So we cannot send the message into a
closed channel. And we can't detect if a channel
is closed before we try and send a message
into it. However, if we go on the receiving
side, then the story gets a little bit brighter.
So you might ask the question, how does the
four range loop know that the channel is closed,
it has to have some way of detecting it, what
turns out that there's more than one parameter
that you can pull back from the channel. So
just like when we're querying maps, and we're
trying to get a value out of a map, and we
can use that comma, okay, syntax, well, that
syntax works for channels as well. So if I
change this example up a little bit, and this
is going to do exactly the same thing as our
current example, here using a four range loop,
but instead of using the four range loop,
and having go automatically processed the
closed channel for us, we're going to process
this manually. So let me paste in this example
and show you so notice that I'm in a for loop
in this go routine, and I don't have any conditions
on it. So this is going to execute forever.
Down here, then I'm receiving a message from
the channel, and I'm using the comma. Okay,
syntax. So I'm going to get the value from
the channel and I and I'm going to get a Boolean
letting me know if the channels open or not
in the okay variable. So if the channel is
open, then okay is going to be true. If the
channel is closed, then Okay, it's going to
be false. So the happy path, if okay is true,
then I'm going to go ahead and print out my
message. Otherwise, I'm going to break out
of this for loop here, because the channels
closed, and I'm not going to be receiving
any more messages from it. So this is functionally
exactly the same as the four range construct.
But we're explicitly seeing this comma, okay,
syntax. So which one would you use?
Well, in this situation, it would make more
sense to use the for range construct. But
there may be situations where you're receiving
data from a channel, and you're not in a loop.
So maybe you're spinning off a new go routine
for every time you're processing a message.
And so the loop is going to contain the spinning
off of the go routines. And so you're going
to need this comma, okay syntax, because it
might not make sense to use the for range
loop. Now, the last thing that I want to talk
about in this video are what are called SELECT
statements. So let me go ahead and paste in
this code here. So we talked about in the
last video, how there can be situations where
you create go routines that don't have an
obvious way to close. And that's what I want
to try and illustrate here. So if I go ahead
and run this, we see that we do get these
messages printed out. So I'm just doing a
simple logger implementation. So what you
see here is I've got some constants that are
declaring my log level, I've got a struct
that I've declared the holding the timestamp
for the login tree, the severity of the log
level, and then whatever message I'm trying
to print out, then I'm creating a log channel.
And the way this application works, is the
first thing the main function does is it spins
up this go routine, that's going to be my
logger. And what it's going to do is it's
simply going to monitor that log channel for
log entries that are coming from throughout
my application. So the idea is I've got a
central logger, and anything that could do
logging in, my application just needs to know
about this channel. And all of my logging
logic can be hidden within the processing
of those log channel messages. So the logger
is down here, we've got a four range loop
that's listening for messages from the log
channel. And all it's doing is it's printing
out a formatted message that's got the timestamp,
it's got the log level, and it's got the message
from the log. So no big deal here, nothing
terribly exciting. Then my main function goes
on to exercise that a little bit, it sends
two messages into the log channel, one letting
it know that the application is starting another
one letting the application note shutting
down. And then I've got a sleep call here
just to make sure that the logger co routine
has enough time to process that. Now you notice
my timestamps are a little funny here. That's
because I'm working with the playground, I
promise you this code does work. If you shifted
over to Visual Studio code, you will actually
get real timestamps. But for some reason,
the playground doesn't give you the current
time when you call the now function. And so
this is just something that we're going to
have to work with in this example. Now the
problem I want you to consider is when does
the logger go routine closed down. So obviously,
the logger go routine has to terminate sometime
because the program finishes execution, and
we get the results back from the playground.
So what's happening here is remember, an application
is shut down as soon as the last statement
of the main function finishes execution. So
when we finish this sleep call here, the application
terminates and everything is torn down and
all resources are reclaimed as the go runtime
returns all of the resources that it was using
back to the operating system. So what that
means is that our logger go routine is being
torn down forcibly. There's no graceful shutdown
for this go routine. It's just being ripped
out because the main function has done. Now
in some situations like this one that may
be acceptable. But there are many situations
where you want to have much more control over
a go routine. Because remember what I said
in the go routine video, you should always
have a strategy for how your go routine is
going to shut down when you create your go
routine. Otherwise, it can be a subtle resource
leak, and eventually, it can leak enough resources
that it can bring your application down. So
there's a couple of different things we could
do here, right, we could of course, do a defer
call here, we can pass in an anonymous function.
And inside of that, we could go ahead and
close the log channel. So what that's going
to do is when the main function exits, it's
going to go ahead and close the channel, and
then we are gracefully shutting down that
channel. And that works just fine. There's
no issues with that we are intentionally closing
down the channel, we know how our go routine
is going to close. And so this is perfectly
acceptable in this use case. But this isn't
what I want to show you. So this is certainly
something you could use in this use case.
But I want to show you another way that very
commonly used in these kinds of situations.
So the way that I want to show you is using
what's called a select statement. So let me
go ahead and paste in that code. And we'll
walk through that. So the application
is basically the same, I've got the same constants
have here, I've got the same struct, I do
have this additional channel here. And notice
the type signature for it. So it's strongly
typed, but it's strongly typed to a struct
with no fields. Now struct with no fields
in the go language is unique in that it requires
zero memory allocations. So a lot of times
you will see a channel set up like this. And
the intention is it can send any data through
except for the fact that a message was sent
or received. So this is what's called a signal
only channel. There's zero memory allocations
required in sending the message. But we do
have the ability to just let the receiving
side know that a message was sent. So this
is pretty common, you might be tempted if
you're new to the language, like I first did
you send a Boolean in here. But that does
actually require a variable to be allocated
and copied. So it is actually better to use
an empty struct because it saves a couple
of memory allocations. It's a little bit minor.
But it is something that if you are going
to use a channel as a pure message, then you
might as well go with the conventions and
use this approach. So our main function is
exactly the same as it was before. We've got
our logger, we've got our log channel, sending
in a couple of messages. And then we got a
sleep call here. And then inside of our logger
function, we've got an infinite loop now,
and we're using this select block. So what
this SELECT statement does is the entire statement
is going to block until a message is received
on one of the channels that it's listening
for. So in this case, we've got a case listening
for messages from the log channel, and the
case listening for messages from the done
channel. So if we get a message from the log
channel, then we're going to print out our
log entry. If we get a message from the done
channel, then we're going to go ahead and
break out of this for loop. So what this allows
us to do is at the end of our application,
we can go ahead and pass in a message into
our dumb channel. And that is going to be
an empty struct. And I'm just going to define
that empty struct on the fly here. So this
is a little bit confusing syntax. But this
is the type signature for my struct. So I'm
defining a struct with no fields. And then
I'm initializing that struct using these curly
braces here. So if I go ahead and run this,
you see that the application runs properly.
So I do process my log messages. And then
I pass in this message into my done channel
when I wish the logger to shut down. So this
is a common situation for you to use when
you're monitoring channels. And you need a
way to have the go routine that's monitoring
those handles be able to terminate. So very
often you're going to send in normally as
a parameter, you're going to send in this
done channel. And then whatever's ready to
kill the go routine, will go ahead and send
a message into that done channel. And it'll
go ahead and kill it. Now one more thing that
I do want to talk about. And I'm not going
to actually run it because it's going to break
our application here. But you can have a default
case here. And if you do, then this no longer
becomes a blocking SELECT statement. So what
this is going to do is if there's a message
ready on one of the channels that are being
monitored, then it's going to execute that
code path. If not, it will execute a default
block. So this is useful. If you want to have
a non blocking SELECT statement, then you
need to have that default case in there. If
you don't have the default case, then the
select statement will block forever until
a message does come in. Okay, so that's what
I have to talk about with channels. Let's
go into a summary and review what we've talked
about. In this video, we talked about channels
and how we can use them to synchronize data
transmission between go routines. We started
out by talking about the basics of working
with channels. And we learned that we can
make our channels using the built in make
function and how that's really the only way
that we have available in the go routine to
make a channel. When we do make those channels,
those channels are strongly typed. So we're
going to use the chain keyword to indicate
that we wish to create a channel and then
we have to follow that with the data type
that the channel is going to be Send and Receive.
Now that data type can be anything, it can
be a primitive like we see here with an integer,
it can be a struct, it can be an interface.
But it does have to be strongly typed, we
can send a message into the channel using
this arrow syntax. And the position of the
arrow kind of indicates the direction that
the data is going to flow. So in this case,
we list channel, we have the arrow and then
the value that we wish to send into the channel.
So notice that the arrow is pointing into
the channel. But when we went to receive messages
from the channel, then the arrow is leading
out of the channel. And so we're going to
use the same arrow syntax, but the channel
is going to be added after the arrow instead
of before. And we can have multiple senders
and receivers. As a matter of fact, it's very
common. As a matter of fact, it's very common
for one channel to be distributed among multiple
go routines. And that way, you can have multiple
data generators that are sending messages
into the channel, as well as multiple data
receivers. And that allows you to balance
the performance between senders and receivers.
So if you can generate data 10 times as fast
as you can process it, then you can create
10 times as many receivers. And that way you
can balance the workload out between senders
and receivers.
We then talked about how to restrict data
flow. Buying default, channels are bi directional
constructs, so you can send and receive data
into a channel. Now very often what we want,
though, is our go routines to be designed
to handle channel data only in one direction.
So we saw that we can do that by passing in
the channel. But then on the receiving side.
So for example, in the argument list of the
function, we can actually specify the direction
that we can work with by again adding that
arrow, and we either add it before or after
the chain keyword. Depending on what kind
of channel that we want to make, we can make
a send only channel by putting the arrow after
the chain keyword, and we can make a receive
only channel by adding the arrow before it.
We then talk about buffered channels, and
how buffered channels contain internal data
stores that allow us to get around this limitation
of channels that by default, a channel will
block the sender side until a receiver is
available, and the receiver side will be blocked
until a message is available to come out of
the channel. So you can actually block a go
routine on the sending side or the receiving
side of the channel. So if there's no position
available in the channel to add the message,
then the sending side will be blocked until
a space does become available. And if there's
no message in the channel, then the receiving
side is going to be blocked until a message
becomes available for it to work with. So
in order to decouple that we can add an integer
as a second argument to the main function.
And that's going to allow the channel to have
an internal buffer to decouple your senders
and receivers, just in case there are situations
where data is generated faster than it's received.
So just like it says here, we want to use
buffered channels when sending and receiving
have asymmetric loading. So if we can generate
messages faster than we can receive them,
then a lot of times a buffered channel is
a really good way to go. We then moved on
to talk about four range loops, and specifically
how to work with them with channels. And we
learned that they basically work the same
way. But there are a couple of subtle differences.
The first thing is the first parameter that
you're going to receive from the four range
loop when working with channels is the value
itself, not the index, like we saw when we
were using for range loops over arrays, slices
and maps. And we saw how we can use for range
loops to monitor channel and process messages
as they arrive. So the four range loop is
just going to keep pulling messages as they
come in off the channel. And it'll process
them as they come. Then when the channel gets
closed, the four range loop is going to detect
that and it will go ahead and exit the loop.
And finally, we talked about SELECT statements,
and how they work kinda like switch statements,
but they work only in the context of channels,
and how they allow a go routine to monitor
several channels at the same time. Now if
they block if all channels are blocked, so
if there's no messages available on any channel,
then the select statement will block by default.
And then when a message comes in, it will
go ahead and process that on the proper case.
If multiple channels receive value simultaneously,
then the behavior is actually undefined. So
because of the highly parallel nature of many
go applications, you can get into situations
where messages arrive on two channels at virtually
the same time. So one of those cases will
get the nod from the Select block, but you
can't be sure of which one's going to get
it. So there is no rule like in switch block
where the first one that matches is going
to get it, it could be anyone. So the ordering
of the cases in your SELECT statements really
doesn't matter from the standpoint of how
those conflicts are going to get resolved.
Now if you do want a non blocking SELECT statement,
remember that you can add that default case
in there. So if there are no messages on any
of the monitored channels, then the default
case will go ahead and fire and so the select
statement will process and execution of the
go routine will continue from there.
Okay,
so that wraps up what I have to talk about
with channels. And really it brings us to
the end of the discussion that I have for
this introduction to go series for now. This
is Mike vansickle wishing you luck in all
of your gopher endeavors.
Take care